---
layout: default
title: EEGLAB 2017 Aspet
permalink: /workshops/EEGLAB_2017_Aspet.html
parent: Workshops
---

![700px\|thumb\|center\|upright=2.5]({{ site.baseurl }}/assets/images/Group_aspet2017.jpg)

![250px\|thumb\|right\|upright=2.5\|Scenery of the Pyrenees
mountains]({{ site.baseurl }}/assets/images/Pyrennees.png)

Twenty-fourth EEGLAB Workshop
=============================

<span style="color: blue">Aspet, France - July 3-7, 2017</span>
The 24th EEGLAB Workshop will take place from Monday, July 3rd through
Friday, July 7h in the village of Aspet in the Pyrenees foothills in
southwest France near Toulouse. Participants will be expected to bring
laptops with Matlab installed so as to be able to participate in the
practical sessions. The tutorial workshop will introduce and demonstrate
the use of the EEGLAB software environment and EEGLAB-linked tools for
performing advanced analysis of EEG and related data, with detailed
method expositions and practical exercises. The workshop will be held at
a French family vacation camp, with hiking and other recreational
opportunities available. Meals will be served family style.

Registration and cost
---------------------

To reimburse travel expenses of Workshop faculty and facilities rental,
costs for the workshop will be as follows:

Registration cost is <b>670 Euros for students and post-docs in private
rooms, </b> and <b>770 Euros for faculty and others with private
rooms</b> (Note: A discounted price of 420 Euros is available if you
come from a French laboratory as the CNRS, who sponsors the workshop,
will pay for the difference - a full discounted price of 0 euros is
available for CNRS employees - if this is the case, select the French
laboratory registration and apply the CNRS employee discount on the
registration site). The registration costs includes shuttle bus
transportation from the Toulouse airport to Aspet (about 1 hour) and
back, conference space rental, all coffee breaks, and a short excursion
by bus to the Pyrenees mountains. In addition, <b>the total cost of room
and board for 5 days (single private room), 4 nights lodging with all
meals is included</b>. Note that this is a non-profit event for which
the faculty are not compensated. If you wish to bring your partner to
stay in your room with you, this is possible although a supplement will
apply (to be paid directly to the Bois Perche center).

The facility where the workshop will take place is the [Bois
Perche](http://translate.google.com/translate?hl=en&sl=fr&u=http://www.vpt31.net/bois-perche.html&prev=/search%3Fq%3Dbois%2Bperche%26hl%3Den%26biw%3D1119%26bih%3D703&sa=X&ei=62NDUbf7CpSxhAfuh4HQDw&ved=0CDsQ7gEwAA),
a family-oriented rural facility. We have held four enjoyable EEGLAB
workshops at this location since 2007.

Space at the workshop is limited to 46 participants and is available on
a first come, first served basis.

<b>Warning: </b> This workshop is <em>not</em> aimed for real beginners
in EEG and Matlab - such persons would be wasting much of their time.
Some parts of the workshop are fairly technical. The main topics will be
advanced methods for analyzing EEG and allied behavioral data, methods
including spectral decomposition, independent component analysis,
inverse source analysis, information flow, etc.. Some other parts of the
workshop will require basic Matlab scripting capabilities. Some basic
web resources for learning Matlab are discussed below. Beginners may
also gain experience using Matlab by applying the steps discussed in the
EEGLAB wiki tutorial to the sample dataset which you can freely
download.

<b>Registration:</b> <span style="color: red">Workshop is full</span>.

Participants from French laboratories must also download this [form](https://sccn.ucsd.edu/githubwiki/files/2017inscriptioneeglab.pdf) and send it to theaddress on the form
 (otherwise discounted registration may be denied).

Relevant reading material
-------------------------

The EEGLAB graphic interface is built using the powerful Matlab
scripting language. Enjoying the full capabilities of EEGLAB for
building macro commands and performing custom and automated processing
requires basic knowledge of how to manipulate EEGLAB data structures in
Matlab. Because of time constraints, we will NOT provide an introduction
to Matlab scripting. Instead, attendees must familiarize themselves with
Matlab <b>before</b> coming to the workshop.

New users of Matlab: We recommend running the following demos and
reading these help sections:

After opening the Matlab desktop, select menu item "Help Demos" and run
the following demos. Note that while a demo is running, you can retype
the text (or copy it) to the main Matlab window:


- Mathematics - Basic Matrix Operations

- Mathematics - Matrix manipulations

- Graphics - 2-D Plots

- Programming - Manipulating Multidimentional arrays

- Programming - Structures


In the Help Content, read and practice at least the following sections:



- Getting Started - Matrices and Arrays - Matrices and Magic squares

- Getting Started - Matrices and Arrays - Expressions

- Getting Started - Matrices and Arrays - Working with Matrices

- Getting Started - Graphics - Basic plotting functions

- Getting Started - Programming - Flow Control

- Getting Started - Programming - Other data structures

- Getting Started - Programming - Scripts and Functions

Each section or demo (if read thoroughly) should take you about 10
minutes, for a total here of about 2 hours. If you do not use Matlab
regularly, we encourage you to watch these demos, read these sections,
and practice using the skills they introduce over several days.

If you do not have access to the Matlab demos,
[here](http://sccn.ucsd.edu/eeglab/matlaboverview.html) is a short
online introduction to Matlab (recommended pages, 1 to 12)

<span style="color: "dark blue"">*IMPORTANT NOTE:*</span> A portion of the
workshop will be dedicated to writing EEGLAB scripts -- Not being able
to understand Matlab syntax will mean you will miss out on a large
portion of the workshop.

*EEGLAB WIKI:* Refer to the [EEGLAB tutorial wiki](/EEGLAB "wikilink")
for additional help.

<b>Material for the working (including EEGLAB) will be made available on
USB keys during the workshop.</b> Presentation slides will be made
available during the workshop. You only need to bring to the workshop a
laptop with Matlab installed.

Important papers describing EEGLAB processing:
----------------------------------------------

Delorme, A., Makeig, S. [EEGLAB: an open source toolbox for analysis of
single-trial EEG dynamics including independent component
analysis](https://sccn.ucsd.edu/githubwiki/files/eeglab_published.pdf). J Neurosci Methods.2004; Mar 15; 134(1):9-21.

Makeig, S., Debener, S., Onton, J., Delorme, A. [Mining event-related
brain dynamics](https://sccn.ucsd.edu/githubwiki/files/ticsreview_published.pdf). TrendsCogn Sci. 2004; May; 8(5):204-10.

Jung, TP, Makeig, S, Westerfield, M, Townsend, J, Courchesne, E,
Sejnowski, TJ. [Analysis and visualizaion of single-trial event-related
potentials](https://sccn.ucsd.edu/githubwiki/files/jung_hbm01.pdf). Human Brain Mapping.2001; 14(3), 166-185.

Delorme, A., Palmer, J. Oostenveld, R., Onton, J., Makeig, S.
[<font color=blue>Independent components of EEG data are
dipolar</font>](http://www.plosone.org/article/info%3Adoi%2F10.1371%2Fjournal.pone.0030135).
PLoS ONE. 2012. i7(2):e30135.

Delorme, A., Sejnowski, T., Makeig, S. [Improved rejection of artifacts
from EEG data using high-order statistics and independent component
analysis](https://sccn.ucsd.edu/githubwiki/files/neuroimage2007_reformated.pdf). Neuroimage.2007; 34, 1443-1449.

Onton J, Delorme, A., Makeig, S. [Frontal midline EEG dynamics during
working memory](https://sccn.ucsd.edu/githubwiki/files/onton_fmtheta_published.pdf).NeuroImage. 2005;27, 341-356

Workshop Program (with corresponding PDFs)
------------------------------------------

<span style="color: purple">Purple lettering = lecture</span>
<span style="color: orange">Orange lettering = tutorial</span>

<u><span style="color: blue">Monday, July 3rd</span></u>


16:30 -- Train station shuttle bus pick up

17:00 -- Airport shuttle bus pick up

<font color = green>


19:45 -- Dinner (included in registration)</font>

20:45 – 21:30 -- Optional beginner Matlab course by Ramon Martinez

<u><span style="color: blue">Tuesday, July 4th</span></u>


<span style="color: green">7:00 - 8:30 Breakfast</span>

<!-- -->


**Overview and ICA Theory/Practice**


<span style="color: purple">8:30 – 9:45 -- Mining event-related brain dynamics I (Scott Makeig)</span>

<span style="color: purple">9:45 – 10:15 -- EEGLAB overview (Arnaud Delorme)</span>[PDF](https://sccn.ucsd.edu/githubwiki/files/eeglab2017_ad_eeglab_overview2.pdf)

<span style="color: green">-- Break--</span>

<span style="color: purple">10:30 – 11:30 -- ICA theory (Scott Makeig)</span>

<span style="color: orange">11:30 – 12:30 -- Data import, Artifact rejection (Arnaud Delorme)</span>[PDF](https://sccn.ucsd.edu/githubwiki/files/eeglab2017_aspet_artifact_and_ica.pdf)
<!-- -->


<span style="color: green">12:30-13:45 Lunch --</span>

<!-- -->


**ICA and time-frequency**


<span style="color: orange">13:45 – 14:30 -- ICA decomposition practicum (Arnaud Delorme)</span>[PDF](https://sccn.ucsd.edu/githubwiki/files/tuesday_run_ica_and_plot.pdf)

<span style="color: orange">14:30 – 15:15 -- Evaluating ICA components practicum (Arnaud Delorme)</span>[PDF](https://sccn.ucsd.edu/githubwiki/files/tuesday_ica_evaluation.pdf‎)

<span style="color: orange">15:15 – 15:45 -- Bootstraping ICA (Fiorenzo Artoni)</span>

<span style="color: green">-- Break--</span>

<span style="color: purple">16:00 – 17:00 -- Time-frequency decompositions: Theory and practice (Tim Mullen)</span>

<span style="color: green">19:45 -- Dinner</span>

<u><span style="color: blue">Wednesday, July 5th</span></u>


<span style="color: green">7:30 - 8:30 Breakfast</span>

**Group analysis and ICA clustering in EEGLAB**


<span style="color: purple">8:30 - 9:00 -- Why cluster ICA components? (Scott Makeig)</span>

<span style="color: purple">9:00 - 9:30 -- Robust statistics and correction for multiple comparisons (Cyril Pernet)</span>

<span style="color: purple">9:30 - 10:30 -- Creating a STUDY and STUDY design - plotting and computing statistics in channels (Arnaud Delorme)</span>[PDF](https://sccn.ucsd.edu/githubwiki/files/eeglab2017_ad_study_design.pdf)

<span style="color: green">-- Break--</span>

<span style="color: purple">10:45 - 11:45 -- ICA component clustering and plotting (Arnaud Delorme)</span> [PDF](https://sccn.ucsd.edu/githubwiki/files/eeglab2017_ad_study_clustering.pdf)

<span style="color: purple">11:45 - 12:45 -- Group analysis using EEGLAB studies and scripting (Arnaud Delorme)</span> [PDF](https://sccn.ucsd.edu/githubwiki/files/eeglab2017_ad_study_scipting.pdf)
<!-- -->


<span style="color: green">12:45-13:45 Lunch --</span>

<!-- -->


<span style="color: green">13:45-18:00-- Hiking excursion</span>

<!-- -->


<span style="color: green">19:45 -- Dinner</span>

<u><span style="color: blue">Thursday, July 6th</span></u>


<span style="color: green">7:30 - 8:30 Breakfast</span>

<!-- -->


**Source Localization**


<span style="color: purple">8:30 – 9:30 -- Forward and inverse models - the Dipfit tools (Robert Oostenveld)</span>

<span style="color: purple">9:30 – 10:00 -- Using the Dipfit plugin of EEGLAB (Arnaud Delorme)</span>

<!-- -->



<span style="color: green">-- Break--</span>

<!-- -->


**General Linear Modeling**


<span style="color: orange">10:15 – 12:00 -- Theory and practice of applying general linear models to EEG data using the LIMO EEGLAB plug-in (Cyril Pernet)</span>

<span style="color: orange">12:00 – 12:30 -- The future of LIMO and EEGLAB (Arnaud Delorme)</span>

<!-- -->


<span style="color: green">12:30-13:45 Lunch --</span>

<!-- -->


**Source information flow**


<span style="color: purple">13:45 – 14:30 -- Source information flow and Granger-Causal modeling tools (Tim Mullen)</span>

<span style="color: orange">14:30 – 15:30 -- SIFT toolbox: Theory and live demo (Tim Mullen)</span>


<span style="color: green">-- Break--</span>

<span style="color: orange">15:45 – 17:30 -- SIFT toolbox: practicum (Tim Mullen)</span> [PDF](https://sccn.ucsd.edu/githubwiki/files/sift_i_practicum.pdf)



<span style="color: green">19:45 -- Dinner </span>

<span style="color: orange">20:00 - 23:00 -- SIFT hackathon, meet with Tim Mullen and his computer at the bar - ask anything you like </span>

<!-- -->



<span style="color: orange">20:00 - 23:00 -- LIMO hackathon, meet with Cyril Pernet and his computer at the bar - ask anything you like </span>

<u><span style="color: blue">Friday, July 7th</span></u>


<span style="color: green">7:30-8:30 -- Breakfast</span>


<span style="color: purple">8:30 – 9:30 -- Mining event-related brain dynamics II (Scott Makeig)</span>

<span style="color: orange">9:30 – 10:00 -- Using and building EEGLAB extensions/plug-ins (Arnaud Delorme)</span>

<span style="color: green">-- Break--</span>

<span style="color: orange">10:15 – 11:30 -- Practicum, small group projects</span>

<span style="color: orange">11:30 – 12:00 -- Participant project presentations and general discussion</span>


<span style="color: green">12:15 -- Lunch</span>

<!-- -->


<span style="color: black">13:00 -- Airport/train station shuttle bus leaves Bois Perche</span>

<span style="color: black">14:30+ -- Airport/train station shuttle bus arrives in Toulouse</span>


