---
layout: default
title: EEGLAB 2012 Beijing
permalink: /workshops/EEGLAB_2012_Beijing
parent: Workshops
---

[250px\|thumb\|right\|upright=2.5\|Beijing landmark
bridge]({{ site.baseurl }}/assets/images/Beijing.png)

Fifteenth EEGLAB Workshop
=========================

<font color=blue>Beijing, China - June 16-18, 2012</font>
The 15th EEGLAB Workshops will take place from Saturday June 16th
through Monday June 18th at Tsinghua University in Beijing, China.
Participants will be expected to bring laptops with Matlab installed so
as to be able to participate in the practical sessions. We will
introduce and demonstrate the use of EEGLAB-linked tools for performing
advanced analyses of EEG and related data, with detailed method
expositions and practical exercises.

![center\|600px]({{ site.baseurl }}/assets/images/Group_picture_beijing.png)

Downloads
---------

<font color = green>Slides will be made available during the
workshop.</font>

You may also download and uncompress the anonymized data used in the
workshop below.

[EEGLAB](ftp://sccn.ucsd.edu/pub/daily/) The latest version of EEGLAB.

[Tutorial
scripts](ftp://sccn.ucsd.edu/pub/julie/EEGLAB_Workshop/Scripts.zip)
Download scripts and data for tutorial sessions with scripting
components.

[EEGLAB dataset: single
subject](ftp://sccn.ucsd.edu/pub/julie/EEGLAB_Workshop/SampleDataset125Hz.zip)
This dataset will be used for the first few Tutorial sessions.

[EEGLAB STUDY with 13 subjects (2.3
GB)](ftp://sccn.ucsd.edu/pub/STUDYstern.zip) This is a VERY large file
and may fail the first few times you try. Make sure you have a fast and
reliable Internet connection before attempting this download.

[EEGLAB STUDY with 5 subjects (1.8
GB)](ftp://sccn.ucsd.edu/pub/STUDY5subjects.zip) Optional download for
more STUDY exploration.

The following files are needed for the Source Information Flow Toolbox
practicum:

Please visit [the SIFT
website](http://sccn.ucsd.edu/wiki/SIFT#SIFT_Downloads/) and download
all files (SIFT Toolbox, ARFIT toolbox, and Sample Data (143 Mb). It is
also highly recommended that you download the [SIFT
Handbook/Manual](http://sccn.ucsd.edu/mediawiki/images/d/d2/SIFT_manual_0.1a.pdf)
as we will use this for exercises.

Costs
-----

Registration costs are the following (this is a non-profit event): $150
for students/post-doc (RMB 900 for Chinese participants) and $300 for
faculty /professional (RMB 1800 for Chinese participants). This includes
conference room rental, all lunches, all coffee breaks, and a short
excursion. We will provide a list of hotels on the worksop web page.
Registration will be performed on a first come first serve basis.
Registration closes when the workshop is at capacity or on April 15th.
Please register using the link below.

The workwhsop is now <font color = red>FULL</font>.

Visa
----

![250px\|right]({{ site.baseurl }}/assets/images/Chinese_visa.png)

EEGLAB participants are requested to check with the Chinese Consulate or
diplomatic mission in their home country for visa requirements. It is
the responsibility of the participant to obtain a visa if required.
Please note that the Chinese visa application process can take weeks, so
make sure to plan ahead. For more information on the process for your
home country, please go to <http://www.travelchinaguide.com/embassy/>.

If you participate to HBM, please use the
[HBM](http://www.humanbrainmapping.org/i4a/pages/index.cfm?pageid=3466)
web site. You can print your letter directly from the site. Note that
you can also print the letter if you are not sure to go yet.

If you do not participate to HBM, please let us know at and we will send
you a letter. Please contact [Wang Yijun](mailto:wangyijun97@gmail.com).

Lodging
-------

A map of the university is shown below

[ <File:Beijing_map1.png> ](/_File:Beijing_map1.png "wikilink")

With the legend below. Note the red pin which is the actual location of
the conference room.

[ <File:Beijing_map2.png> ](/_File:Beijing_map2.png "wikilink")

-   **Boya Hotel**

Webpage: <http://www.thelakeviewhotel.com.cn/en/info.html> Online Price:
(standard single/double room) RMB 1018 (\~ $162) per night

-   **Wenjin Hotel**

Webpage: <http://www.wenjin.com.cn/en/index.html> Online Price:
(standard single/double room) RMB 928 ($147) per night

-   **Holiday Inn Beijing Haidian** (about $93 per night)

Webpage:
<http://www.holidayinn.com/hotels/us/en/beijing/pegsh/hoteldetail?cm_mmc=Baidu>

-   **Jinchun Garden**

Guest House Hotel on Campus (only 10 rooms available). Please contact
only if limited mobility or if you are a student from a third world
country. For this booking, contact [Wang
Yijun](mailto:wangyijun97@gmail.com).

Chinese participants: there is a wider choice of hotel which do not
accept credit card and do not speak english. Contact [Wang
Yijun](mailto:wangyijun97@gmail.com) to obtain the list.

Relevant reading material:
--------------------------

EEGLAB graphic interface is built on top of the powerful Matlab
scripting language. Enjoying the full capabilities of EEGLAB for b



Getting Started - Matrices and Arrays - Matrices and Magic squares

Getting Started - Matrices and Arrays - Expressions

Getting Started - Matrices and Arrays - Working with Matrices

Getting Started - Graphics - Basic plotting functions

Getting Started - Programming - Flow Control

Getting Started - Programming - Other data structures

Getting Started - Programming - Scripts and Functions

Each section or demo (if read thoroughly) should take you about 10
minutes, for a total here of about 2 hours. We encourage you to watch
these demos and read these sections over several days.

If you do not have access to the Matlab demos,
[here](http://sccn.ucsd.edu/eeglab/matlaboverview.html) is a short
online introduction to Matlab (recommended pages, 1 to 12)

*IMPORTANT NOTE:* A portion of the workshop will be dedicated to writing
EEGLAB scripts, so not being able to understand Matlab syntax will
result in you missing out on a large portion of the workshop.

*EEGLAB WIKI:* refer to the [EEGLAB wiki](/EEGLAB "wikilink") for
additional help.

Important papers describing EEGLAB processing:
----------------------------------------------

Delorme, A., Makeig, S. [EEGLAB: an open source toolbox for analysis of
single-trial EEG dynamics including independent component
analysis](https://sccn.ucsd.edu/githubwiki/pdfs/Eeglab_published.pdf). J Neurosci Methods.2004; Mar 15; 134(1):9-21.

Delorme, A., Palmer, J. Oostenveld, R., Onton, J., Makeig, S.
[Independent EEG sources are
dipolar](http://sccn.ucsd.edu/%7Escott/pdf/Delorme_EEG_ICs_are_dipolar_lo.pdf).
PLoS One, in press.

Makeig, S., Debener, S., Onton, J., Delorme, A. [Mining event-related
brain dynamics](https://sccn.ucsd.edu/githubwiki/pdfs/Ticsreview_published.pdf). TrendsCogn Sci. 2004; May; 8(5):204-10.

Makeig, S., Onton, J. [ERP features and EEG dynamics: An ICA
Perspective](http://sccn.ucsd.edu/%7Escott/pdf/Makeig_Onton_LuckERP11.pdf),
Oxford Handbook of ERP Components, Ed. Luck & Kappenman, 2011

Jung, TP, Makeig, S, Westerfield, M, Townsend, J, Courchesne, E,
Sejnowski, TJ. [Analysis and visualizaion of single-trial event-related
potentials](https://sccn.ucsd.edu/githubwiki/pdfs/Jung_hbm01.pdf). Human Brain Mapping.2001; 14(3), 166-185.

Delorme, A., Sejnowski, T., Makeig, S. [Improved rejection of artifacts
from EEG data using high-order statistics and independent component
analysis](https://sccn.ucsd.edu/githubwiki/pdfs/Neuroimage2007_reformated.pdf). Neuroimage.2007; 34, 1443-1449.

Onton J, Delorme, A., Makeig, S. [Frontal midline EEG dynamics during
working memory](https://sccn.ucsd.edu/githubwiki/pdfs/Onton_fmtheta_published.pdf).NeuroImage. 2005;27, 341-356

Material for download
---------------------

Please download the following programs

> To be posted here at a later date.

Preliminary Workshop Program
----------------------------

<font color=purple>Purple lettering = lecture</font>
<font color=orange>Orange lettering = tutorial</font>

<u><font color=blue>Saturday, June 16</font></u>


<font color = green>7:30 - 8:30 Breakfast</font>

<!-- -->


**Overview and ICA Theory/Practice**


<font color = purple>8:30 – 9:30 -- [Mining event-related brain dynamics
I](https://sccn.ucsd.edu/githubwiki/pdfs/Eeglab_beijing_i.pdf) (Scott Makeig)</font>
<font color = purple>9:30 – 10:00 -- EEGLAB overview (Arnaud Delorme)
[(PDF)](https://sccn.ucsd.edu/githubwiki/pdfs/Eeglab2012_ad_eeglab_overview.pdf)</font>

<font color = green>-- Break--</font>

<font color = purple>10:30 – 11:15 -- ICA theory (Tzyy-Ping Jung)</font>

<font color = orange>11:15 – 12:00 -- Data import, artifact rejection
and ICA decomposition (Julie Onton)
[(PDF)](https://sccn.ucsd.edu/githubwiki/pdfs/1_gettingstarted_eeglab.pdf)[(Task)](https://sccn.ucsd.edu/githubwiki/pdfs/Sternbergtaskexplanation.pdf)</font>
<!-- -->


<font color = green>12:00-13:00 Lunch --</font>

<!-- -->


**ICA, time-frequency and information flow**


<font color = orange>13:00 – 14:00 -- Evaluating ICA components (Julie
Onton) [(PDF)](https://sccn.ucsd.edu/githubwiki/pdfs/2_evaluatingics.pdf)</font>
<font color = purple>14:00 – 15:00 -- Time-Frequency decompositions and
practicum (Tim Mullen)</font>
[(PDF)](https://sccn.ucsd.edu/githubwiki/pdfs/Timefrequency_analysis.pdf‎)
<!-- -->



<font color=green> --Break -- </font>

<!-- -->



<font color=purple>15:30 – 16:30 -- SIFT toolbox: Source information
flow and granger causality tools (Tim Mullen) </font>
[(PDF)](https://sccn.ucsd.edu/githubwiki/pdfs/Sift_lecture.pdf‎) [SIFTmanual](https://sccn.ucsd.edu/githubwiki/pdfs/Eeglab2011_tm_sift.pdf‎)
<font color=orange>16:30 – 17:30 -- Using the SIFT toolbox (Tim
Mullen)</font> [(PDF)](https://sccn.ucsd.edu/githubwiki/pdfs/Sift_practicum.pdf‎)
<!-- -->



<font color=orange>17:30 – 19:00 -- Data and helpers available</font>

<!-- -->


<font color = green>19:00 -- Dinner</font>

<u><font color=blue>Sunday, June 17th</font></u>


<font color = green>7:30 - 8:30 Breakfast</font>

<!-- -->


**Source Localization**


<font color = purple>8:30 – 9:15 -- [Forward and inverse EEG source
modeling](https://sccn.ucsd.edu/githubwiki/pdfs/Forwardinverse_beijing12.pdf) - (ScottMakeig)</font>

(see also [this note on the importance of knowing skull
conductivity](http://sccn.ucsd.edu/wiki/NFT_Appendix_C))

<font color = orange>9:15 – 10:00 -- Using the NFT and Dipfit plug-ins
(Julie
Onton)[(Dipfit)](https://sccn.ucsd.edu/githubwiki/pdfs/3_dipfit.pdf)[(nft)](/media:nft_presentation12.pdf)</font>
<!-- -->



<font color = green>-- Break--</font>

<!-- -->


**Component Clustering**


<font color = orange>10:30 – 11:00 -- Creating EEGLAB studies and study
designs (Arnaud
Delorme)[(PDF)](https://sccn.ucsd.edu/githubwiki/pdfs/Eeglab2012_ad_study_design.pdf)</font>
<font color= orange>11:00 – 12:00 -- Independent Component Clustering
(Arnaud Delorme)
[(PDF)](https://sccn.ucsd.edu/githubwiki/pdfs/Eeglab2012_ad_study_clustering.pdf)</font>
<!-- -->


<font color=green>12:00-13:00 Lunch --</font>

<!-- -->


**Processing multiple subjects using STUDY tools**


<font color = orange>13:00 – 14:00 -- Plotting measures and computing
statistics for EEGLAB studies (Arnaud Delorme)
[(PDF)](https://sccn.ucsd.edu/githubwiki/pdfs/Eeglab2012_ad_study_plot_stats.pdf)</font>
<font color = orange>14:00 – 15:00 -- STUDY structure and scripting for
EEGLAB studies (Arnaud Delorme)
[(PDF)](https://sccn.ucsd.edu/githubwiki/pdfs/Eeglab2012_ad_study_advanced_and_scripts.pdf)</font>
<!-- -->



<font color = green>-- Break--</font>

<!-- -->



<font color = orange>15:15 – 16:00 -- Trial-by-trial data visualization
and accessing raw data (Julie
Onton)[(PDF)](https://sccn.ucsd.edu/githubwiki/pdfs/4_singletrialscripting.pdf)</font>
<!-- -->



<font color = orange>16:00 – 19:00-- Practicum on datasets and results
presentation</font>

<!-- -->


<font color=green>19:00 -- Dinner </font>

<u><font color=blue>Monday, June 18th</font></u>


<font color=green>7:30-8:30 -- Breakfast</font>

<!-- -->



<font color=purple>8:30 – 9:00 -- Mining event-related brain dynamics II
(Scott Makeig)</font>

<font color=purple>9:00 – 9:30 -- The near future of wireless EEG and
mobile brain/body imaging (Tzyy Ping Jung)</font>

<font color=orange>9:30 – 10:00 -- Building and publishing EEGLAB
plug-ins (Arnaud Delorme)
[(PDF)](https://sccn.ucsd.edu/githubwiki/pdfs/Eeglab2012_ad_eeglab_plugins.pdf)</font>
<!-- -->



<font color = green>-- Break--</font>

<!-- -->



<font color=purple>10:30 – 11:30 -- Brain-computer interface (BCI)
design: Theory and practice (Christian Kothe)</font>

<font color=orange>11:30 – 12:30 -- Using BCILAB (Christian
Kothe)</font>

<!-- -->


<font color=green>12:30 - 13:30 Lunch</font>

<!-- -->


<font color=green>14:00 – 17:30 -- Excursion</font>


<font color=orange>17:30 – 18:30 -- Final discussion (Makeig, Jung,
Delorme and all)</font>

<!-- -->


<font color = green>18:30 workshop ends</font>

[Category:Workshops](/Category:Workshops "wikilink")
