---
layout: default
title: EEGLAB 2011 Aspet
permalink: /workshops/EEGLAB_2011_Aspet.html
parent: Workshops
---

[250px\|thumb\|right\|upright=2.5\|Cows breeding in the Pyrenees moutain
range]({{ site.baseurl }}/assets/images/Cow-breeds.jpg)

Thirteenth EEGLAB Workshop
==========================

<font color=blue>Aspet, France - June 20-23, 2011</font>
The 13th EEGLAB Workshops will take place from Monday June 20th through
Thursday June 23rd in the village of Aspet in the Pyrenees mountains in
France. Participants will be expected to bring laptops with Matlab
installed so as to be able to participate in the practical sessions. The
workshops will consist of two parts: the first part on Monday June 20th
is an advanced single-trial EEG processing one-day symposium will be
held. Speakers will include S. Makeig (US), A. Delorme (FR/US), T.
Mullen (US), M. Congedo (FR), O. David (FR), C. Benar (FR), B. Burle
(FR), G. Rousselet (UK), C. Perret (UK), R. Oostenveld (NL). The second
part on Tuesday, June 21 through noon on Thursday, June 23, will
introduce and demonstrate the use of EEGLAB-linked tools for performing
advanced analyses of EEG and related data, with detailed method
expositions and practical exercises.

Downloads
---------

<font color = green>**To access the talk slides and videos, use the
links in the Program listing above! Slides will be made available during
the workshop.**</font>

You may also download and uncompress the anonymized data used in the
workshop below.

[EEGLAB](ftp://sccn.ucsd.edu/pub/daily/eeglab10_2_2_3b.zip) The latest
version of EEGLAB 10.2.2.3b.

[Evaluate ICs example
dataset](ftp://sccn.ucsd.edu/pub/julie/EEGLAB_Workshop/faces_data.zip)
Download example data used in 'Evaluate ICs' tutorial for component
properties discussion.

[Tutorial scripts](ftp://sccn.ucsd.edu/pub/scripts.zip) Download scripts
and data for tutorial sessions with scripting components.

[EEGLAB dataset: single
subject](ftp://sccn.ucsd.edu/pub/julie/EEGLAB_Workshop/Data.zip) This
dataset will be used for the first few Tutorial sessions.

[(smaller) EEGLAB dataset: single
subject](ftp://sccn.ucsd.edu/pub/julie/EEGLAB_Workshop/SmallStern.zip)
This is the same dataset as above but is cut down in size for people who
are encountering memory issues with the full dataset.

[EEGLAB STUDY with 13 subjects (2.3
GB)](ftp://sccn.ucsd.edu/pub/STUDYstern.zip) This is a VERY large file
and may fail the first few times you try. Make sure you have a fast and
reliable Internet connection before attempting this download.

[EEGLAB STUDY with 5 subjects (1.8
GB)](ftp://sccn.ucsd.edu/pub/STUDY5subjects.zip) Optional download for
more STUDY exploration.

The following files are needed for the Source Information Flow Toolbox
practicum:

Please visit [the SIFT
website](http://sccn.ucsd.edu/wiki/SIFT#SIFT_Downloads/) and download
all files (SIFT Toolbox, ARFIT toolbox, and Sample Data (143 Mb). It is
also highly recommended that you download the [SIFT
Handbook/Manual](http://sccn.ucsd.edu/mediawiki/images/d/d2/SIFT_manual_0.1a.pdf)
as we will use this for exercises.

Costs
-----

To reimburse travel expenses of Workshop faculty and facilities rental,
costs for the workshop will be as follows:

Registration costs are the following: three day workshop + Symposium
(June 20st to 23rd): <b>290 euros for students</b> and post-doc and
<b>440 euros for faculty</b>. This includes conference room rental, the
shuttle from Toulouse airport to Aspet (about 1 hour) and back, all
coffee breaks, and a short excursion by bus to the Pyrenees mountains.
In addition, <b>360 euros is the total cost of lodging</b> for 4 days in
a private room and all meals (to be paid with registration costs). Note
that this is a non-profit event and that none of the faculties are
compensated.

Registration is open on a first come first serve basis. Based on
experience from previous workshops, we expect the workshop will fill up
within a few days, so do not wait to register (space is limited to 40
participants). Registration closes when the workshop is at capacity.

Please register
[here](http://sccn.ucsd.edu/eeglab/workshop11Aspet/indexapplication.html).
For participants affiliated with a laboratory in France, please contact
[Sylvie Cabal](mailto:sylvie.cabal@dr14.cnrs.fr) as the registration
process is different.

Relevant reading material:
--------------------------

EEGLAB graphic interface is built on top of the powerful Matlab
scripting language. Enjoying the full capabilities of EEGLAB for
building macro commands and performing custom and automated processing
requires the ability to manipulate EEGLAB data structures in Matlab.
Because of time constrains, we will NOT provide an introduction to the
Matlab language. Instead users need to familiarize themselves with
Matlab prior to the workshop. Users of Matlab 7: we recommend running
the following demos and reading the following help sections.

After opening the Matlab desktop, select menu item "Help Demos" and run
the following demos. Note that while the demo is running, you can retype
the text (or copy it) to the main Matlab window:



Mathematics - Basic Matrix Operations

Mathematics - Matrix manipulations

Graphics - 2-D Plots

Programming - Manipulating Multidimentional arrays

Programming - Structures


In the Help Content, read and practice at least the following sections:



Getting Started - Matrices and Arrays - Matrices and Magic squares

Getting Started - Matrices and Arrays - Expressions

Getting Started - Matrices and Arrays - Working with Matrices

Getting Started - Graphics - Basic plotting functions

Getting Started - Programming - Flow Control

Getting Started - Programming - Other data structures

Getting Started - Programming - Scripts and Functions

Each section or demo (if read thoroughly) should take you about 10
minutes, for a total here of about 2 hours. We encourage you to watch
these demos and read these sections over several days.

If you do not have access to the Matlab demos,
[here](http://sccn.ucsd.edu/eeglab/matlaboverview.html) is a short
online introduction to Matlab (recommended pages, 1 to 12)

*IMPORTANT NOTE:* A portion of the workshop will be dedicated to writing
EEGLAB scripts, so not being able to understand Matlab syntax will
result in you missing out on a large portion of the workshop.

*EEGLAB WIKI:* refer to the [EEGLAB wiki](/EEGLAB "wikilink") for
additional help.

Important papers describing EEGLAB processing:
----------------------------------------------

Delorme, A., Makeig, S. [EEGLAB: an open source toolbox for analysis of
single-trial EEG dynamics including independent component
analysis](https://sccn.ucsd.edu/githubwiki/pdfs/Eeglab_published.pdf). J Neurosci Methods.2004; Mar 15; 134(1):9-21.

Makeig, S., Debener, S., Onton, J., Delorme, A. [Mining event-related
brain dynamics](https://sccn.ucsd.edu/githubwiki/pdfs/Ticsreview_published.pdf). TrendsCogn Sci. 2004; May; 8(5):204-10.

Jung, TP, Makeig, S, Westerfield, M, Townsend, J, Courchesne, E,
Sejnowski, TJ. [Analysis and visualizaion of single-trial event-related
potentials](https://sccn.ucsd.edu/githubwiki/pdfs/Jung_hbm01.pdf). Human Brain Mapping.2001; 14(3), 166-185.

Delorme, A., Sejnowski, T., Makeig, S. [Improved rejection of artifacts
from EEG data using high-order statistics and independent component
analysis](https://sccn.ucsd.edu/githubwiki/pdfs/Neuroimage2007_reformated.pdf). Neuroimage.2007; 34, 1443-1449.

Delorme, A., Palmer, J. Oostenveld, R., Onton, J., Makeig, S. [Comparing
results of algorithms implementing blind source separation of EEG
data](https://sccn.ucsd.edu/githubwiki/pdfs/Delorme_unpub.pdf). unpublished manuscript.
Onton J, Delorme, A., Makeig, S. [Frontal midline EEG dynamics during
working memory](https://sccn.ucsd.edu/githubwiki/pdfs/Onton_fmtheta_published.pdf).NeuroImage. 2005;27, 341-356

Material for download
---------------------

Please download the following programs

> To be posted here at a later date.

Workshop Program (with corresponding PDFs)
------------------------------------------

<font color=purple>Purple lettering = lecture</font>
<font color=orange>Orange lettering = tutorial</font>

<u><font color=blue>Sunday, June 19</font></u>


16:30 -- train station shuttle pick up

17:00 -- shuttle aiport pick up

<font color = green>


19:00 -- diner (included in registration)</font>

<u><font color=blue>Monday, June 20st</font></u> <b>- Symposium on EEG
advanced signal processing</b>


<font color = green>7:00 - 8:45 Breakfast</font>


8:45 – 9:00 -- Arnaud Delorme, opening remarks.

<!-- -->


<b>Independent component analysis</b> (moderator Guillaume Rousselet)

<font color = purple>



9:00 – 9:30 -- Arnaud Delorme, Toulouse, France & San Diego, USA. More
independent ICA decompositions are more biologically plausible.

9:30 – 10:00 -- Scott Makeig, San Diego, USA. Mobile brain imaging: ICA
based analysis methods and directions.

10:00 – 10:30 -- Marco Congedo, Grenoble, France. Recent Advances on
Joint EEG Decomposition and Sparse Spatially Filtered Classification.

</font>



<font color = green>-- Break--</font>

<!-- -->


<b>EEG spatio-temporal analysis methods</b> (moderator Tim Mullen)

<font color = purple>



11:00 – 11:30 -- Boris Burle, Marseille, France. Improving spatial (and
temporal...) resolution of EEG: different methods, different
assumptions...

11:30 - 12:00 -- Christian Benar, Marseille, France. Investigation of
networks involved in interictal epileptiform discharges by MEG and
intracerebral EEG

</font>



<font color = green>-- Lunch Break (included in registration)--</font>

<!-- -->


<b>EEG statistical analysis</b> (moderator Scott Makeig)

<font color = purple>



1:30 – 2:00 -- Robert Oostenveld, Nijmegen, The Nederlands.
Randomization tests as a general workhorse for statistical inference on
EEG data.

2:00 – 2:30 -- Cyril Pernet, Edinburg, UK. Hierarchical Linear Modeling
for MEEG data: current approaches and future directions
[PDF](https://sccn.ucsd.edu/githubwiki/pdfs/11_aspet_eeglab_symposium_pernet.pdf‎)
2:30 – 3:00 -- Guillaume Rousselet, Glasgow, UK. Robust statistics for
EEG data analyses: central tendency, dispersion, and inferences.
[PDF](https://sccn.ucsd.edu/githubwiki/pdfs/11_aspet_eeglab_symposium_rousselet.pdf‎)
</font>



<font color = green>-- Break--</font>

<!-- -->


<b>EEG causal network analysis</b> (moderator Christian Benar)

<font color = purple>



3:30 – 4:00 -- Tim Mullen, San Diego, USA. Modeling multivariate EEG
source information flow using adaptive vector autoregressive models.

4:00 – 4:30 -- Olivier David, Grenoble, France. Dynamic causal modeling.

4:30 – 5:00 -- General discussion.

5:00 -- Symposium ends.

</font>


<font color = orange>5:30 – 6:30 -- Matlab refresher course
(optional).</font>

<u><font color=blue>Tuesday, June 21st</font></u>


<font color = green>7:30 - 8:30 Breakfast</font>

<!-- -->


**Overview and ICA Theory/Practice**


<font color = purple>8:30 – 9:30 -- Mining event-related brain dynamics
I (Scott Makeig)</font>
[PDF](https://sccn.ucsd.edu/githubwiki/pdfs/Eeglab2011_sm_mining_brain_dynamics.pdf‎)
<font color = purple>9:30 – 10:00 -- EEGLAB overview (Arnaud
Delorme)</font>
[PDF](https://sccn.ucsd.edu/githubwiki/pdfs/Eeglab2011_ad_eeglab_overview.pdf‎)

<font color = green>-- Break--</font>

<font color = purple>10:30 – 11:15 -- ICA theory (Arnaud Delorme)</font>
[PDF](https://sccn.ucsd.edu/githubwiki/pdfs/Eeglab2011_ad_lecture_ica.pdf‎)
<font color = orange>11:15 – 12:00 -- Data import, Artifact rejection
and running ICA (Claire Braboszcz)</font>
[PDF](https://sccn.ucsd.edu/githubwiki/pdfs/Eeglab2011_cb_evaluate_ic.pdf‎)
<!-- -->


<font color = green>12:00-13:00 Lunch --</font>

<!-- -->


**ICA, time-frequency and information flow**


<font color = purple>13:00 – 14:00 -- Evaluating ICA components (Claire
Braboszcz)</font>
[PDF](https://sccn.ucsd.edu/githubwiki/pdfs/Eeglab2011_cb_evaluate_ic.pdf‎)
<font color = purple>14:00 – 15:00 -- Time-Frequency decompositions and
practicum (Tim Mullen)</font>
[PDF](https://sccn.ucsd.edu/githubwiki/pdfs/Eeglab2011_tm_time_frequency.pdf)
<!-- -->



<font color=green>-- Break –</font>

<!-- -->



<font color=purple>15:30 – 16:30 -- SIFT toolbox: Information flow and
granger causality tools (Tim Mullen)</font>
[PDF](https://sccn.ucsd.edu/githubwiki/pdfs/Eeglab2011_tm_sift.pdf‎), [SIFTmanual](https://sccn.ucsd.edu/githubwiki/pdfs/Eeglab2011_tm_sift.pdf‎)
<font color=orange>16:30 – 17:30 -- SIFT toolbox: practicum (Tim
Mullen)</font>

<!-- -->



<font color=orange>17:30 – 19:00 -- Data and workstation
available</font>

<!-- -->


<font color = green>19:00 -- Dinner</font>

<u><font color=blue>Wednesday, June 22nd</font></u>


<font color = green>7:30 - 8:30 Breakfast</font>

<!-- -->


**Source Localization**


<font color = purple>8:30 – 9:30 -- Forward and inverse models - the
Dipfit plugin (Robert Oostenveld)</font>
[PDF](https://sccn.ucsd.edu/githubwiki/pdfs/Eeglab2011_ro_source_modeling.pdf‎)
<font color = purple>9:30 – 10:00 -- Why cluster independent components
(Scott Makeig)</font>
[PDF](https://sccn.ucsd.edu/githubwiki/pdfs/Eeglab2011_sm_why_cluster.pdf‎)
<!-- -->



<font color = green>-- Break--</font>

<!-- -->


**Component Clustering**


<font color = orange>10:30 – 11:00 -- creating STUDY designs (Arnaud
Delorme)</font> [PDF](https://sccn.ucsd.edu/githubwiki/pdfs/Eeglab2011_ad_study_design.pdf‎)
<font color= orange>11:00 – 12:00 -- Independent Component Clustering
(Romain Grandchamp)</font>
[PDF](https://sccn.ucsd.edu/githubwiki/pdfs/Eeglab2011_rm_study_clustering.pdf‎)
<!-- -->


<font color=green>12:00-13:00 Lunch --</font>

<!-- -->


**Processing multiple subjects using STUDY tools**


<font color = purple>13:00 – 13:30 -- Statistical tools implemented
within EEGLAB and future directions (Guillaume Rousselet)</font>
[PDF](https://sccn.ucsd.edu/githubwiki/pdfs/11_aspet_eeglab_statistics.pdf‎)
<font color = orange>13:30 – 14:30 -- Plotting measures and computing
statistics in with studies (Arnaud Delorme)</font>
[PDF](https://sccn.ucsd.edu/githubwiki/pdfs/Eeglab2011_ad_study_plot_stats‎.pdf)
<font color = orange>14:30 – 15:30 -- Scripting with studies (Arnaud
Delorme)</font>
[PDF](https://sccn.ucsd.edu/githubwiki/pdfs/Eeglab2011_ad_study_advanced_and_scripts.pdf)
<!-- -->


<font color = green>15:30-18:00-- Excursion to
[Saint-Bertrand-de-Comminges](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Saint-Bertrand-de-Comminges)</font>

<!-- -->


<font color=green>19:00 -- Dinner </font>

<u><font color=blue>Thursday, June 23rd</font></u>


<font color=green>7:30-8:30 -- Breakfast</font>

<!-- -->



<font color=purple>8:30 – 9:30 -- Mining event-related brain dynamics II
(Scott Makeig)</font>
[PDF](https://sccn.ucsd.edu/githubwiki/pdfs/Eeglab2011_sm_mining_brain_dynamics2.pdf)
<font color=orange>9:30 – 10:00 -- EEGLAB plugins (Arnaud
Delorme)</font>
[PDF](https://sccn.ucsd.edu/githubwiki/pdfs/Eeglab2011_ad_eeglab_plugins.pdf)
<!-- -->



<font color = green>-- Break--</font>

<!-- -->



<font color=orange>10:30 – 11:30 -- Practicum, project available</font>

<font color=orange>11:30 – 12:00 -- Participant project presentation and
general discussion</font>

<!-- -->


<font color=green>12:00 -- Lunch</font>

<!-- -->


<font color=green>13:30 -- Airport/train station shuttle leaves</font>

[Category:Workshops](/Category:Workshops "wikilink")