---
layout: default
title: EEGLAB 2015 Aspet
permalink: /workshops/EEGLAB_2015_Aspet.html
parent: Workshops
---

[250px\|thumb\|right\|upright=2.5\|Cows enjoying the scenery of the
Pyrenees mountains]({{ site.baseurl }}/assets/images/Cow-breeds.jpg)

Nineteenth EEGLAB Workshop
==========================

<font color=blue>Aspet, France - May 25-29, 2015</font>
The 19th EEGLAB Workshop will take place from Monday, May 25th through
Friday, May 29th in the village of Aspet in the Pyrenees foothills in
southwest France near Toulouse. Participants will be expected to bring
laptops with Matlab installed so as to be able to participate in the
practical sessions. The tutorial workshop will introduce and demonstrate
the use of the EEGLAB software environment and EEGLAB-linked tools for
performing advanced analysis of EEG and related data, with detailed
method expositions and practical exercises. The workshop will be held at
a French family vacation camp, with hiking and other recreational
opportunities available. Meals will be served family style.

Registration and cost
---------------------

To reimburse travel expenses of Workshop faculty and facilities rental,
costs for the workshop will be as follows:

Registration cost is <b>570 Euros for students and post-docs in
two-person rooms, </b> and <b>790 Euros for faculty and others with
private rooms</b> (Note: A discounted price is available if you come
from a French laboratory since this workshop is sponsored by the CNRS).
The registration costs includes shuttle bus transportation rfom the
Toulouse airport to Aspet (about 1 hour) and back, conference space
rental, all coffee breaks, and a short excursion by bus to the Pyrenees
mountains. In addition, <b>the total cost of room and board for 5 days,
4 nights lodging with all meals is included</b>. Note that this is a
non-profit event for which the faculty are not compensated.

The facility where the workshop will take place is the [Bois
Perche](http://translate.google.com/translate?hl=en&sl=fr&u=http://www.vpt31.net/bois-perche.html&prev=/search%3Fq%3Dbois%2Bperche%26hl%3Den%26biw%3D1119%26bih%3D703&sa=X&ei=62NDUbf7CpSxhAfuh4HQDw&ved=0CDsQ7gEwAA),
a family-oriented rural facility. We have held four enjoyable EEGLAB
workshops at this location since 2007.

Space at the workshop is limited to 40 participants and is available on
a first come, first served basis.

<b>Warning: </b> This workshop is not for beginners in EEG and Matlab -
such persons would be wasting much of their time. Some parts of the
workshop are fairly technical. The main topics will be advanced methods
for analyzing EEG and allied behavioral data, methods including spectral
decomposition, independent component analysis, inverse source analysis,
information flow, etc.. Some other parts of the workshop will require
basic Matlab scripting capabilities. If you are interested in a slightly
more basic EEGLAB workshop, you might want to attend the one in
Sheffield in September 2015 (though this workshop will not be aimed at
true EEG beginners either). Some basic web resources for learning Matlab
are discussed below.

Registration pages:

<Font color=red>The workshop is now full. Send us an email at
<eeglab@sccn.ucsd.edu> if you want to be placed on the waiting
list</font>

Downloads
---------

<font color = green>**To access most recent previous versions the talk
slides and videos, use the links in the Program listing below! Slides
will be made available during the workshop.**</font>

[Download EEGLAB](ftp://sccn.ucsd.edu/pub/daily/eeglab12_0_2_1b.zip).
Download the latest version of EEGLAB 12.0.2.1b.

Optional download below. Data will be made available on USB keys during
the workshop.

[Download a smaller version of the same EEGLAB
dataset](ftp://sccn.ucsd.edu/pub/julie/EEGLAB_Workshop/SmallStern.zip).
This is the same dataset as above but is cut down in size for people who
encounter out-of-memory issues in working with the full dataset.

[Download an EEGLAB STUDY with data from 13
subjects](ftp://sccn.ucsd.edu/pub/STUDYstern.zip). This is a VERY large
(2.3GB) file and may even fail to download the first few times you try.
Make sure you have a fast and reliable Internet connection before
attempting this download.

[Download an EEGLAB STUDY with 5 subjects (1.8
GB)](ftp://sccn.ucsd.edu/pub/STUDY5subjects.zip). Optional download for
more exploration of EEGLAB studies.

The following files are needed for the Source Information Flow Toolbox
(SIFT) practicum:

Please visit [the SIFT
website](http://sccn.ucsd.edu/wiki/SIFT#SIFT_Downloads/) to download all
the available files (SIFT Toolbox, ARFIT toolbox, and Sample Data (143
Mb). We also highly recommend that you download the [SIFT
Handbook/Manual](http://sccn.ucsd.edu/mediawiki/images/d/d2/SIFT_manual_0.1a.pdf)
as we will use this for exercises.

Relevant reading material
-------------------------

The EEGLAB graphic interface is built using the powerful Matlab
scripting language. Enjoying the full capabilities of EEGLAB for
building macro commands and performing custom and automated processing
requires basic knowledge of how to manipulate EEGLAB data structures in
Matlab. Because of time constraints, we will NOT provide an introduction
to Matlab scripting. Instead, attendees must familiarize themselves with
Matlab <b>before</b> coming to the workshop.

New users of Matlab: We recommend running the following demos and
reading these help sections:

After opening the Matlab desktop, select menu item "Help Demos" and run
the following demos. Note that while a demo is running, you can retype
the text (or copy it) to the main Matlab window:



Mathematics - Basic Matrix Operations

Mathematics - Matrix manipulations

Graphics - 2-D Plots

Programming - Manipulating Multidimentional arrays

Programming - Structures

In the Help Content, read and practice at least the following sections:



Getting Started - Matrices and Arrays - Matrices and Magic squares

Getting Started - Matrices and Arrays - Expressions

Getting Started - Matrices and Arrays - Working with Matrices

Getting Started - Graphics - Basic plotting functions

Getting Started - Programming - Flow Control

Getting Started - Programming - Other data structures

Getting Started - Programming - Scripts and Functions

Each section or demo (if read thoroughly) should take you about 10
minutes, for a total here of about 2 hours. If you do not use Matlab
regularly, we encourage you to watch these demos, read these sections,
and practice using the skills they introduce over several days.

If you do not have access to the Matlab demos,
[here](http://sccn.ucsd.edu/eeglab/matlaboverview.html) is a short
online introduction to Matlab (recommended pages, 1 to 12)

<font color="dark blue">*IMPORTANT NOTE:*</font> A portion of the
workshop will be dedicated to writing EEGLAB scripts -- Not being able
to understand Matlab syntax will mean you will miss out on a large
portion of the workshop.

*EEGLAB WIKI:* Refer to the [EEGLAB tutorial wiki](/EEGLAB "wikilink")
for additional help.

Important papers describing EEGLAB processing:
----------------------------------------------

Delorme, A., Makeig, S. [EEGLAB: an open source toolbox for analysis of
single-trial EEG dynamics including independent component
analysis](https://sccn.ucsd.edu/githubwiki/pdfs/Eeglab_published.pdf). J Neurosci Methods.2004; Mar 15; 134(1):9-21.

Makeig, S., Debener, S., Onton, J., Delorme, A. [Mining event-related
brain dynamics](https://sccn.ucsd.edu/githubwiki/pdfs/Ticsreview_published.pdf). TrendsCogn Sci. 2004; May; 8(5):204-10.

Jung, TP, Makeig, S, Westerfield, M, Townsend, J, Courchesne, E,
Sejnowski, TJ. [Analysis and visualizaion of single-trial event-related
potentials](https://sccn.ucsd.edu/githubwiki/pdfs/Jung_hbm01.pdf). Human Brain Mapping.2001; 14(3), 166-185.

Delorme, A., Palmer, J. Oostenveld, R., Onton, J., Makeig, S.
[<font color=blue>Independent components of EEG data are
dipolar</font>](http://www.plosone.org/article/info%3Adoi%2F10.1371%2Fjournal.pone.0030135).
PLoS ONE. 2012. i7(2):e30135.

Delorme, A., Sejnowski, T., Makeig, S. [Improved rejection of artifacts
from EEG data using high-order statistics and independent component
analysis](https://sccn.ucsd.edu/githubwiki/pdfs/Neuroimage2007_reformated.pdf). Neuroimage.2007; 34, 1443-1449.

Onton J, Delorme, A., Makeig, S. [Frontal midline EEG dynamics during
working memory](https://sccn.ucsd.edu/githubwiki/pdfs/Onton_fmtheta_published.pdf).NeuroImage. 2005;27, 341-356

Material for download
---------------------

Please download the following programs

> `    `<font color=orange>`To be posted here at a later date.`</font>

Workshop Program (with corresponding PDFs)
------------------------------------------

<font color=purple>Purple lettering = lecture</font>
<font color=orange>Orange lettering = tutorial</font>

<u><font color=blue>Monday, May 25th</font></u>


16:30 -- Train station shuttle bus pick up

17:00 -- Airport shuttle bus pick up

<font color = green>


19:45 -- Dinner (included in registration)</font>

<u><font color=blue>Tuesday, May 26th</font></u>


<font color = green>7:00 - 8:30 Breakfast</font>

<!-- -->


**Overview and ICA Theory/Practice**


<font color = purple>8:30 – 9:45 -- Mining event-related brain dynamics
I (Scott Makeig)</font>

<font color = purple>9:45 – 10:15 -- EEGLAB overview (Arnaud
Delorme)</font>


<font color = green>-- Break--</font>

<font color = purple>10:30 – 11:30 -- ICA theory (Arnaud Delorme)</font>

<font color = orange>11:30 – 12:30 -- Data import, Artifact rejection
(Tracy Brandmeyer)</font>

<!-- -->


<font color = green>12:30-13:45 Lunch --</font>

<!-- -->


**ICA and time-frequency**


<font color = orange>13:45 – 14:30 -- ICA decomposition practicum
(Arnaud Delorme)</font>

<font color = orange>14:30 – 15:30 -- Evaluating ICA components
practicum (Arnaud Delorme)</font>


<font color = green>-- Break--</font>

<font color = purple>15:45 – 17:00 -- Time-frequency decompositions:
Theory and practice (Tim Mullen)</font>

<!-- -->


<font color = green>19:45 -- Dinner</font>

<u><font color=blue>Wednesday, May 27th</font></u>


<font color = green>7:30 - 8:30 Breakfast</font>

<!-- -->


**Group analysis and ICA clustering in EEGLAB**


<font color = purple>8:30 - 9:00 -- Why cluster ICA components? (Scott
Makeig)</font>

<font color = purple>9:00 - 9:30 -- Robust statistics and correction for
multiple comparisons (Arnaud Delorme)</font>

<font color = purple>9:30 - 10:30 -- Creating a STUDY and STUDY design
(Arnaud Delorme)</font>


<font color = green>-- Break--</font>

<!-- -->



<font color = purple>10:45 - 11:45 -- Plotting and computing statistics
in channels and components in STUDY (Arnaud Delorme)</font>

<font color = purple>11:45 - 12:45 -- Group analysis using EEGLAB
studies: Methods to cluster ICA components (Arnaud Delorme)</font>

<!-- -->


<font color = green>12:45-13:45 Lunch --</font>

<!-- -->


<font color = green>13:45-18:00-- Hiking excursion</font>

<!-- -->


<font color = green>19:45 -- Dinner</font>

<u><font color=blue>Thursday, May 28th</font></u>


<font color = green>7:30 - 8:30 Breakfast</font>

<!-- -->


**Source Localization**


<font color = purple>8:30 – 9:30 -- Forward and inverse models - the
Dipfit tools (Robert Oostenveld)</font>

<font color = purple>9:30 – 10:00 -- The Neuroelectromagnetic Forward
Head Modeling (NFT) and NIST (Inverse Source Imaging) toolkits (Scott
Makeig)</font>

<!-- -->



<font color = green>-- Break--</font>

<!-- -->


**General Linear Modeling**


<font color = orange>10:15 – 12:00 -- Theory and practice of applying
general linear models to EEG data using the LIMO EEGLAB plug-in (Cyril
Pernet)</font>

<font color = orange>12:00 – 12:30 -- The future of LIMO and EEGLAB
(Arnaud Delorme)</font>

<!-- -->


<font color=green>12:30-13:45 Lunch --</font>

<!-- -->


**Source information flow**


<font color=purple>13:45 – 14:30 -- Source information flow and
Granger-Causal modeling tools (Tim Mullen)</font>

<font color=orange>14:30 – 15:30 -- SIFT toolbox: Theory and live demo
(Tim Mullen)</font>


<font color = green>-- Break--</font>

<font color=orange>15:45 – 17:30 -- SIFT toolbox: practicum (Tim
Mullen)</font>

<!-- -->


<font color=green>19:45 -- Dinner </font>

<!-- -->



<font color=orange>20:00 - 23:00 -- SIFT hackathon, meet with Tim Mullen
and his computer at the bar - ask anything you like

<!-- -->



<font color=orange>20:00 - 23:00 -- LIMO hackathon, meet with Cyril
Pernet and his computer at the bar - ask anything you like

<!-- -->



<font color=orange>20:00 - 23:00 -- Fieldtrip hackathon, meet with
Robert Oostenveld and his computer at the bar - ask anything you like

<u><font color=blue>Friday, May 29th</font></u>


<font color=green>7:30-8:30 -- Breakfast</font>

<!-- -->



<font color=purple>8:30 – 9:30 -- Mining event-related brain dynamics II
(Scott Makeig)</font>

<font color=orange>9:30 – 10:00 -- Using and building EEGLAB
extensions/plug-ins (Arnaud Delorme)</font>

<!-- -->



<font color = green>-- Break--</font>

<!-- -->



<font color=orange>10:15 – 11:30 -- Practicum, small group
projects</font>

<font color=orange>11:30 – 12:00 -- Participant project presentations
and general discussion</font>

<!-- -->


<font color=green>12:15 -- Lunch</font>

<!-- -->


<font color=black>13:00 -- Airport/train station shuttle bus leaves Bois
Perche</font>

<font color=black>14:30+ -- Airport/train station shuttle bus arrives in
Toulouse</font>

[Category:Workshops](/Category:Workshops "wikilink")