---
layout: default
title: EEGLAB 2013 UCSD
permalink: /workshops/EEGLAB_2013_UCSD.html
parent: Workshops
---

![697px\|thumb\|center\|upright=3]({{ site.baseurl }}/assets/images/GroupEEGLAB2013.png)



The 17th EEGLAB Workshop drew 104 attendees from as far away as New
Zealand, Korea, and England. The two-track format was successful;
workshop lectures on advanced toolboxes were attended by 10-25, while
60-70 attended the basic EEGLAB introduction. This photo was taken the
last morning.

Seventeenth EEGLAB Workshop
===========================

<font color=blue>San Diego, USA - November 14-18, 2013 following the
Society for Neuroscience meeting in San Diego</font>
The 17th EEGLAB Workshop took place from Thursday evening, November 14th
through Monday, November 18th at San Diego Supercomputer Center of the
University of California San Diego, La Jolla, CA, USA. Participants will
be expected to bring laptops with Matlab installed so as to be able to
participate in the practical sessions. The workshop will introduce and
demonstrate the use of EEGLAB and EEGLAB plug-in tools for performing
analysis of EEG and related data, with detailed method expositions and
practical exercises. The program begins with an open house reception and
poster sharing session the evening (5:00-8:00 pm) of the 14th, a day
following the Society for Neuroscience meeting in downtown San Diego, 25
minutes away. The workshop will end at 5:00 pm on Monday, Nov. 18th.

For any questions, please contact <eeglab2013@sccn.ucsd.edu>.

San Diego and UCSD
------------------

Although less than 60 years old, the [University of California San
Diego](http://ucsd.edu/), sister to UCLA, UC Berkeley, and seven other
UC schools, is now an American research powerhouse. Located by the
spectacular cliffs and beaches of La Jolla, UCSD enjoys near year-round
temperate weather.

Three-track program
-------------------

For the first time, this workshop featured a Three-track design. Each
morning and afternoon, lectures to the whole group were interspersed
with sessions in three tracks. Attendees new to EEGLAB could choose the
basic EEGLAB instruction track. Attendees who were already familiar with
EEGLAB could join work sessions on newer, more advanced EEGLAB toolboxes
and related software. A [<b>program overview is available
here</b>](https://sccn.ucsd.edu/githubwiki/files/programlong2013ucs_handson_v20.pdf).
Registration and cost
---------------------

To reimburse travel expenses of Workshop faculty and costs for the
workshop, costs to participants were as follows: Registration is <b>$350
for students and post-docs</b> and <b>$500 for faculty and others</b>.
This included

-   Conference space rental for 4 days
-   Registration packet and perks
-   All coffee breaks
-   An excursion by bus to the nearby Torrey Pines state park including
    picnic lunch
-   Covering travel/accommodation expenses for some of the speakers
-   Note that this is a non-profit event and none of the faculty are
    compensated

Accommodation are to be paid separately. See the list of hotel
[below](/EEGLAB_2013_UCSD#Accommodation "wikilink").

<b> [Click HERE to register for the
Workshop](http://www.eventbrite.com/event/6654940105).</b>

Accommodation
-------------

We made arrangements with La Jolla hotels for rooms during the workshop.

-   [Sheraton La Jolla](http://www.sheratonlajolla.com/). The hotel is
    about 1 mile (1.5 km) by foot through campus from the Supercomputer
    Center where the workshop was held. <b>We negotiated a special rate
    with this hotel at $119 per night - Note: there are no more rooms at
    this rate.</b> Click
    [here](https://www.starwoodmeeting.com/StarGroupsWeb/res?id=1308261404&key=C2B81)
    to make a reservation.



-   [Estancia La Jolla](http://www.estancialajolla.com/) (closest
    hotel - 10 minutes by foot from the workshop). Ask for the special
    UCSD rate at $179 per night (plus $8 resort fee).



-   [La Jolla Shores Hotel](http://www.ljshoreshotel.com/), beach front
    hotel 3 miles from workshop venue. Daily free shuttle to and from
    the workshop was provided by the hotel upon request (double check
    with the hotel). The rate is currently $187 per night.

Note that lower rates for these hotels or others might be available
through discount web sites (priceline, hotwire, expedia). We will post
it here in case users report this information to us.

Given the high cost of lodging, to share a room and find a roommate we
used the google discussion group
<https://groups.google.com/d/forum/eeglab-workshop-2013-roommates>.

Posters
-------

We provided poster boards for workshop participants to bring and post
their SFN poster if they wished to in a small room adjacent to the
conference room.

Material for download
---------------------

[Material from the workshop is available
here](http://sccn.ucsd.edu/eeglab/workshop17/materials)

Relevant reading material
-------------------------

EEGLAB graphic interface is built on top of the powerful Matlab
scripting language. Enjoying the full capabilities of EEGLAB for
building macro commands and performing custom and automated processing
requires the ability to manipulate EEGLAB data structures in Matlab.
Because of time constraints, we will NOT provide an introduction to the
Matlab language. Instead users need to familiarize themselves with
Matlab prior to the workshop.

Users of Matlab 7: We recommend running the following demos and reading
the following help sections.

After opening the Matlab desktop, select menu item "Help Demos" and run
the following demos. Note that while the demo is running, you can retype
the text (or copy it) to the main Matlab window:


- Mathematics - Basic Matrix Operations

- Mathematics - Matrix manipulations

- Graphics - 2-D Plots

- Programming - Manipulating Multidimentional arrays

- Programming - Structures


In the Help Content, read and practice at least the following sections:



- Getting Started - Matrices and Arrays - Matrices and Magic squares

- Getting Started - Matrices and Arrays - Expressions

- Getting Started - Matrices and Arrays - Working with Matrices

- Getting Started - Graphics - Basic plotting functions

- Getting Started - Programming - Flow Control

- Getting Started - Programming - Other data structures

- Getting Started - Programming - Scripts and Functions


Each section or demo (if read thoroughly) should take you about 10
minutes, for a total here of about 2 hours. We encourage you to watch
these demos, read these sections, and practice using the skills they
introduce over several days.

If you do not have access to the Matlab demos,
[here](http://sccn.ucsd.edu/eeglab/matlaboverview.html) is a short
online introduction to Matlab (recommended pages, 1 to 12)

*IMPORTANT NOTE:* A portion of the workshop will be dedicated to writing
EEGLAB scripts -- not being able to understand Matlab syntax will mean
you will miss out on a large portion of the workshop.

*EEGLAB WIKI:* Refer to the [EEGLAB tutorial wiki](/EEGLAB "wikilink")
for additional help.

Papers describing EEGLAB processing
-----------------------------------

Delorme, A., Makeig, S. [EEGLAB: an open source toolbox for analysis of
single-trial EEG dynamics including independent component
analysis](https://sccn.ucsd.edu/githubwiki/files/eeglab_published.pdf). J Neurosci Methods.2004; Mar 15; 134(1):9-21.

Makeig, S., Debener, S., Onton, J., Delorme, A. [Mining event-related
brain dynamics](https://sccn.ucsd.edu/githubwiki/files/ticsreview_published.pdf). TrendsCogn Sci. 2004; May; 8(5):204-10.

Onton J. S Makeig. [Information-based modeling of event-related brain
dynamics](https://sccn.ucsd.edu/githubwiki/files/pbr06lo.pdf), Progress in Brain ResearchVol. 159, Ed.Neuper & Klimesch, 2006

Delorme, A., Palmer, J. Oostenveld, R., Onton, J., Makeig, S.
[Independent components of EEG data are
dipolar](http://www.plosone.org/article/info%3Adoi%2F10.1371%2Fjournal.pone.0030135).
PLoS ONE. 2012. i7(2):e30135.

S Makeig, Onton J. [ERP features and EEG dynamics: An ICA
perspective](https://sccn.ucsd.edu/githubwiki/files/makeigonton_erp09.pdf). Oxford Handbookof Event-Related Potential Components, Ed. Luck S & Kappenman E, 2011.

Jung, TP, Makeig, S, Westerfield, M, Townsend, J, Courchesne, E,
Sejnowski, TJ. [Analysis and visualization of single-trial event-related
potentials](https://sccn.ucsd.edu/githubwiki/files/jung_hbm01.pdf). Human Brain Mapping.2001; 14(3), 166-185.

Delorme, A., Sejnowski, T., Makeig, S. [Improved rejection of artifacts
from EEG data using high-order statistics and independent component
analysis](https://sccn.ucsd.edu/githubwiki/files/neuroimage2007_reformated.pdf). Neuroimage.2007; 34, 1443-1449.

Onton J, Delorme, A., Makeig, S. [Frontal midline EEG dynamics during
working memory](https://sccn.ucsd.edu/githubwiki/files/onton_fmtheta_published.pdf).NeuroImage. 2005;27, 341-356

Workshop Program
----------------

### <u><font color=dodgerblue>Day 0 - Thursday 14th November, 2013</font></u>


<font color=saddlebrown>5:00 - 8:00 PM -- SCCN Open House Reception and
SfN Poster Show </font>

5:00 - 7:00 PM -- Registration open



### <u><font color=dodgerblue>Day 1 - Friday 15th November, 2013</font></u>


8:00 AM - Registration open

<font color=saddlebrown> 8:00 - 8:30 AM -- Continental breakfast </font>

<font color=mediumblue> 8:30 - 9:30 AM -- Mining event-related brain
dynamics I (Scott Makeig) [\[Download
PDF](https://sccn.ucsd.edu/githubwiki/files/plenaryday1_eeglab_ucsd17_makeig_i.pdf)\]</font>
<font color=mediumblue> 9:30 - 10:15 AM -- ICA decomposition theory &
evaluation (Jason Palmer) [\[Download
PDF](https://sccn.ucsd.edu/githubwiki/files/plenaryday1_ica_jpalmer.pdf)\]</font>
<font color=saddlebrown>10:15 - 10:30 AM -- Coffee break</font>

<font color=mediumblue>10:30 - 11:30 AM -- Time-frequency measures (Tim
Mullen) [\[Download
PDF](https://sccn.ucsd.edu/githubwiki/files/plenaryday1_eeglab_tfanalysis.pdf)\] </font>
<font color=mediumblue>11:30 - 12:00 PM -- EEGLAB overview (Arnaud
Delorme) [\[Download
PDF](https://sccn.ucsd.edu/githubwiki/files/plenaryday1_eeglab_overview_adelorme2.pdf)\]</font>
<font color=saddlebrown>12:00 - 1:25 PM -- Get-together Group Lunch @
SDSC </font>

<font color=mediumblue> 1:25 - 1:40 PM -- BCILAB: Building and testing a
simple BCI model (Christian Kothe) [\[Download
PDF](https://sccn.ucsd.edu/githubwiki/files/plenaryday1_bcilab_intro.pdf)\]</font>
<font color=mediumblue> 1:40 - 1:55 PM -- SIFT: Modeling and Visualizing
Source Connectivity (Tim Mullen) [\[Download
PDF](https://sccn.ucsd.edu/githubwiki/files/plenaryday1_eeglab_sift_intro.pdf)\] </font>
1:55 - 2:00 PM -- Schedule overview: Workshop track system (Scott
Makeig)

2:00 - 5:00 PM -- Concurrent Basic & Advanced Track Sessions (C1)




<font color=saddlebrown> 3:00 - 3:15 PM -- Coffee break </font>

<!-- -->



<font color=red>Track A </font> (Main Auditorium) -
<font color=red>Basic track </font>EEGLAB processing



<font color=mediumblue> 2:00 - 3:00 -- C1.A1: Data import, basic ERP
visualization (Marissa Westerfield) [\[Download
PDF](https://sccn.ucsd.edu/githubwiki/files/c1-a1_dataimport_erpvisualization.pdf)\]
3:15 - 4:00 -- C1.A2: Data cleaning for ICA (Marissa Westerfield)
[\[Download PDF](https://sccn.ucsd.edu/githubwiki/files/c1-a2_cleaning_for_ica.pdf)\]
4:00 - 5:00 -- C1.A3: Performing ICA and evaluating components (Julie
Onton) [\[Download
PDF](https://sccn.ucsd.edu/githubwiki/files/c1-a3_evaluatingics.pdf)\]</font>
<!-- -->



<font color=red> Track B </font> (Vizlab) - Brain-Computer Interface
Methods I (Christian Kothe)



<font color=mediumblue> 2:00 - 3:00 -- C1.B1: Introduction to signals
and signal processing in BCIs [\[Download
PDF](https://sccn.ucsd.edu/githubwiki/files/c1-b1_introduction_to_signals_and_signal_processing_in_bcis.pdf)\]
3:15 - 4:00 -- C1.B2: Introduction to use of machine learning in BCIs
[\[Download
PDF](https://sccn.ucsd.edu/githubwiki/files/c1-b2-introduction_to_machine_learning_in_bcis.pdf)\]
4:00 - 4:30 -- C1.B3: Analysis of event-related potentials in BCIs
[\[Download
PDF](https://sccn.ucsd.edu/githubwiki/files/c1-b3-analysis_of_event-related_potentials_in_bcis.pdf)\]
4:30 - 5:00 -- C1.B4: Practicum: Performing ERP analysis in BCILAB
[\[Download
PDF](https://sccn.ucsd.edu/githubwiki/files/c1-b4-practicum_performing_erp_analysis_with_bcilab.pdf)\]</font>

<!-- -->



<font color=red> Track C </font> (High-Tech room) - Modeling
source-level information flow I (Tim Mullen)



<font color=mediumblue> 2:00 - 3:00 -- C1.A1: Functional and effective
connectivity, linear dynamical systems [\[Download
PDF](https://sccn.ucsd.edu/githubwiki/files/eeglab_vxii_sift_i.pdf)\]
3:15 - 4:00 -- C1.A2: Granger causality, scalp vs. source, adapting to
non-stationarity

4:00 - 5:00 -- C1.A3: Practicum: hands-on walkthrough of SIFT
[\[Download PDF](https://sccn.ucsd.edu/githubwiki/files/eeglab2013_sift_practicum.pdf)\]</font>



### <u><font color=dodgerblue>Day 2 - Saturday, 16th November, 2013</font></u>


<font color=saddlebrown> 8:00 - 8:30 AM -- Continental breakfast </font>

<font color=mediumblue> 8:30 - 9:15 AM -- Theory: The EEG forward and
inverse problem (Zeynep Akalin Acar) </font> [\[Download
PDF](https://sccn.ucsd.edu/githubwiki/files/plenaryday2_eeglab13_forward_inverse_eeg.pdf)\]
<!-- -->


<font color=mediumblue> 9:15 - 9:30 AM -- NFT: Electrical head modeling
and source localization (Zeynep Akalin Acar) </font> [\[Download
PDF](https://sccn.ucsd.edu/githubwiki/files/plenaryday2_eeglab13_nft_overview13.pdf)\]
9:30 - 12:00 PM -- Concurrent basic & advanced track sessions (C2)




<font color=saddlebrown> 10:15 - 10:30 PM -- Coffee break </font>

<!-- -->



<font color=red>Track A </font> (Main Auditorium) -
<font color=red>Basic track </font> EEGLAB processing



<font color=mediumblue> 9:30 - 10:15 -- C2.A1: Plotting dataset measures
(ERPimage, spectrum) (Julie Onton)[\[Download
PDF](https://sccn.ucsd.edu/githubwiki/files/c2-a1_plottingicmeasures.pdf)\]
10:30 - 11:15 -- C2.A2: Localizing IC sources using DIPFIT (Julie
Onton)[\[Download PDF](https://sccn.ucsd.edu/githubwiki/files/c2-a2_dipolemodeling.pdf)\]
11:15 - 12:00 -- C2.A3: Time-frequency dec. and advanced ICA practicum
(Makoto Miyakoshi) </font>[\[Download
envtopo.m](https://sccn.ucsd.edu/githubwiki/files/envtopo_updated_v3.zip)\] [\[Downloadpdf](https://sccn.ucsd.edu/githubwiki/files/c2_a3_time-frequencydecandadvancedicapracticum_updatejan2017.pdf)\]
<!-- -->



<font color=red>Track B </font> (Vizlab) - Brain-Computer Interface
Methods II (Christian Kothe)



<font color=mediumblue> 9:30 - 10:15 -- C2.B1: Analysis of oscillatory
processes [\[Download
PDF](https://sccn.ucsd.edu/githubwiki/files/c2-b1-analysis_of_oscillatory_processes.pdf)\]
10:30 - 11:15 -- C2.B2: Mastering the BCILAB toolbox: scripting and
inner workings [\[Download
PDF](https://sccn.ucsd.edu/githubwiki/files/c2-b2-mastering_the_bcilab_toolbox_scripting_and_inner_workings.pdf)\]
11:15 - 12:00 -- C2.B3: Practicum: scripting oscillatory-process
analyses [\[Download
script](https://sccn.ucsd.edu/githubwiki/files/scripting_tutorial.zip)\] </font>
<!-- -->



<font color=red>Track C </font> (High-Tech room) - Forward head modeling
and source localization (Zeynep Akalin Acar) [\[Download
PDF](https://sccn.ucsd.edu/githubwiki/files/plenaryday2_eeglab13_nft.pdf)\]


<font color=mediumblue> 9:30 - 10:15 -- C2.C1: Building head models
using NFT

10:30 - 11:15 -- C2.C2: Forward and inverse problem solution and
visualization

11:15 - 12:00 -- C2.C3: Practicum: hands-on NFT overview </font>

<!-- -->


<font color=saddlebrown> 12:00 - 1:15 PM -- Lunch on your own </font>

<font color=mediumblue>1:15 - 2:00 PM -- EEGLAB processing across
subjects and IC clustering (Arnaud Delorme) [\[Download
PDF](https://sccn.ucsd.edu/githubwiki/files/plenaryday2_eeglab13_clustering.pdf)\]</font>
2:00 - 5:00 PM -- Concurrent basic & advanced sessions (C3)




<font color=saddlebrown> 3:00 - 3:15 PM -- Coffee break </font>

<!-- -->



<font color=red>Track A </font> (Main Auditorium) - <font color=red>
Basic track </font> Studies, ICA Clustering



<font color=mediumblue> 2:00 - 3:00 -- C3.A1: Creating studies, plotting
and working with STUDY designs (Delorme) [\[Download
PDF](https://sccn.ucsd.edu/githubwiki/files/c3_a1_study_design_delorme.pdf)\]
3:15 - 4:00 -- C3.A2: Clustering STUDY ICs (Makato Miyakoshi)[\[Download
PDF](https://sccn.ucsd.edu/githubwiki/files/c3_a2_clusteringstudyics_makotomiyakoshi_v2.pdf)\]
4:00 - 5:00 -- C3.A3: MPT: Measure Projection Analysis (Nima Bigdely
Shamlo) [\[Download
PDF](https://sccn.ucsd.edu/githubwiki/files/measure_projection_eeglab_workshop_13.pdf)\]</font>
<!-- -->



<font color=red> Track B </font> (Vizlab) - Mobile Brain/Body Imaging
(MoBI) and Real-Time Analysis Concepts



<font color=mediumblue> 2:00 - 3:00 -- C3.B1: MoBI Concept (S. Makeig)

3:15 - 4:00 -- C3.B2: The Lab Streaming Layer for multi-modal data
acquisition (C. Kothe) [\[Download
PDF](https://sccn.ucsd.edu/githubwiki/files/c3-b2-the_lab_streaming_layer_for_multi-modal_data_acquisition.pdf)\]
4:00 - 4:30 -- C3.B3: SNAP environment for interactive experimental
control (C. Kothe) [\[Download
PDF](https://sccn.ucsd.edu/githubwiki/files/c3-b3-snap_environment_for_interactive_experimental_control.pdf)\]
4:30 - 5:00 -- C3.B4: MoBILAB for analysis of multimodal brain imaging
data (A. Ojeda) [\[Download
PDF](https://sccn.ucsd.edu/githubwiki/files/c3_b4_mobilab_aojeda_v2.1.pdf)\]</font>
<!-- -->



<font color=red> Track C </font> (High-Tech room) - Modeling
source-level information flow I (Tim Mullen) <font color=red> \[REPEAT\]
</font>



<font color=mediumblue> 2:00 - 3:00 -- C3.A1: Functional and effective
connectivity, linear dynamical systems [\[Download
PDF](https://sccn.ucsd.edu/githubwiki/files/eeglab_vxii_sift_i.pdf)\]
3:15 - 3:45 -- C3.A2: Granger causality, scalp vs. source, adapting to
non-stationarity

3:45 - 5:00 -- C3.A3: Practicum: hands-on walkthrough of SIFT
[\[Download PDF](https://sccn.ucsd.edu/githubwiki/files/eeglab2013_sift_practicum.pdf)\]</font>




<font color=saddlebrown> 6:30 PM -- Optional birds-of-a-feather group
dinners (sign-up sheets at the registration table) </font>



### <u><font color=dodgerblue>Day 3 - Sunday, 17th November, 2013</font></u>


<font color=saddlebrown> 8:00 - 8:30 AM -- Continental breakfast </font>

<font color=mediumblue> 8:30 - 9:30 AM -- EEG measures and STUDY
statistics (Arnaud Delorme) </font> [\[Download
PDF](https://sccn.ucsd.edu/githubwiki/files/plenaryday3_study_statistics_adelorme_v2.pdf)\]
9:30 - 12:00 PM -- Concurrent basic & advanced track sessions (C4)




<font color=saddlebrown> 10:15 - 10:30 PM -- Coffee break </font>

<!-- -->



<font color=red> Track A </font> (Main Auditorium) - <font color=red>
Basic track </font> EEGLAB processing



<font color=mediumblue> 9:30 - 10:15 -- C4.A1: Running statistics for
EEGLAB STUDY measures (Arnaud Delorme) [\[Download
PDF](https://sccn.ucsd.edu/githubwiki/files/c4.a1-eeglab2013_practicum_statistics_adelorme.pdf)\]
10:30 - 11:00 -- C4.A2: Using the std_envtopo and other STUDY plug-ins
(Makoto Miyakoshi)[\[Download
PDF](https://sccn.ucsd.edu/githubwiki/files/c4_a2_usingthestd_envtopoandotherstudyplug_ins.pdf)\]
11:00 - 11:30 -- C4.A3: Automated artifact rejection for large scale
analysis (C. Kothe) [\[Download
PDF](https://sccn.ucsd.edu/githubwiki/files/c4-a3-automated_artifact_rejection_for_large-scale_analsis.pdf)\]
11:30 - 12:00 -- C4.A4: Comparison of auto. artifact rejection methods
(N. Bigdely Shamlo) [\[Download
PDF](https://sccn.ucsd.edu/githubwiki/files/comparison_of_ica_pre-processing_methods_eeglab_workshop_2013.pdf)\]</font>

<!-- -->



<font color=red> Track B </font >(Vizlab) - Forward head modeling and
source localization (Zeynep Akalin Acar) <font color=red>\[REPEAT\]
</font>



<font color=mediumblue> 9:30 - 10:15 -- C4.B1: Building head models
using NFT

10:30 - 11:15 -- C4.B2: Forward and inverse problem slution and
visualization

11:15 - 12:00 -- C4.B3: Practicum: hands-on NFT overview </font>

<!-- -->



<font color=red> Track C </font> (High-Tech room) - Modeling information
flow II (Tim Mullen)



<font color=mediumblue> 9:30 - 10:15 -- C4.C1: Model validation,
multivariate vs. bivariate, imposing constraints [\[Download
PDF](https://sccn.ucsd.edu/githubwiki/files/eeglab_vxii_sift_ii.pdf)\] ‎
10:30 - 11:00 -- C4.C2: Single-trial estimation, state-space models,
statistical testing

11:00 - 12:00 -- C4.C3: Practicum: hands-on simulation-based training
</font>




<font color=saddlebrown> 12:00 - 3:00 PM -- Group excursion and picnic
lunch at Torrey Pines State Park </font>

3:00 - 5:30 PM -- Concurrent basic & advanced sessions (C5)




<font color=saddlebrown> 3:00 - 3:15 PM -- Coffee break </font>

<!-- -->



<font color=red>Track A </font> (Main Auditorium) -
<font color=red>Basic track: </font> EEGLAB scripting (Arnaud Delorme)



<font color=mediumblue> 3:15 - 4:00 -- C5.A1: EEGLAB structures and
basic scripting [\[Download
PDF](https://sccn.ucsd.edu/githubwiki/files/c5-a1-study_basic_scripting.pdf)\]
4:00 - 4:30 -- C5.A2: More advanced EEGLAB scripting with STUDIES
[\[Download PDF](https://sccn.ucsd.edu/githubwiki/files/c5-a2-study_study_scripting.pdf)\]
4:30 - 5:30 -- C5.A3: Advanced scripting using EEGLAB STUDY structures
</font> [\[Download
PDF](https://sccn.ucsd.edu/githubwiki/files/c5-a3-study_study_scripting.pdf)\]
<!-- -->



<font color=red> Track B </font> (Vizlab) - Brain-Computer Interface
MEthods III (Christian Kothe)



<font color=mediumblue> 3:15 - 4:00 -- C5.B1: Optimization-based
approaches [\[Download
PDF](https://sccn.ucsd.edu/githubwiki/files/c5-b1-optimization-based_approaches.pdf)\]
4:00 - 4:30 -- C5.B2: Neuroscience aspects and outlook [\[Download
PDF](https://sccn.ucsd.edu/githubwiki/files/c5-b2-neuroscience_aspects_and_outlook.pdf)\]
4:30 - 5:30 -- C5.B3: Practicum: extending BCILAB and implementing
custom methods [\[Download
PDF](https://sccn.ucsd.edu/githubwiki/files/c5-b3-practicum_extending_bcilab_and_implementing_custom_methods.pdf)\][\[Download scripts](https://sccn.ucsd.edu/githubwiki/files/bcilab_practicum3_scripts.zip)\]</font>

<!-- -->



<font color=red> Track C </font> (High-Tech room) - Advanced Measure
Calculation and Projection (Nima Bigdely Shamlo)



<font color=mediumblue> 3:15 - 4:30 -- C5.C1: Advanced application of
the Measure Projection Toolbox (MPT) [\[Download
PDF](https://sccn.ucsd.edu/githubwiki/files/practicum_of_measure_projection_eeglab_13.pdf)\]
4:30 - 5:30 -- C5.C2: Joint modeling of temporally overlapping responses
</font>



### <u><font color=dodgerblue>Day 4 - Monday, 18th November, 2013</font></u>


<font color=saddlebrown> 8:00 - 8:30 AM -- Continental breakfast </font>

<font color=mediumblue> 8:30 - 9:30 AM -- Mobile/wireless EEG -
Hardware, software, and applications (Tzyy-Ping Jung) </font>
[\[Download
PDF](https://sccn.ucsd.edu/githubwiki/files/eeglab2013_advances_in_eeg_tpj.pdf)\]
9:30 - 12:00 PM -- Concurrent basic & advanced track sessions (C6)




<font color=saddlebrown> 10:15 - 10:30 PM -- Coffee break </font>

<!-- -->



<font color=red> Track A </font>(Main Auditorium) - <font color=red>
Basic track </font>: Practice projects & EEGLAB plug-in programming
[\[Download PDF](https://sccn.ucsd.edu/githubwiki/files/tracka_eeglab_projects.pdf)\]
<!-- -->



<font color=red> Track B </font> (Vizlab) - EEG data mining in the Big
Data era (N. Bigdely Shamlo, S. Makeig)



<font color=mediumblue> 9:30 - 10:15 -- C6.B1: Imaging half a milion
ICA-component scalp maps

10:30 - 12:00 -- C6.B2: New open source tools for EEG data mining: ESS,
HED, and HeadIT </font>

<!-- -->



<font color=red> Track C </font> (High-Tech room) - Mobile Brain/Body
Imaging and Real-Time Demos and practicum



<font color=mediumblue> Demo: Working with new dry EEG headsets (Y.T.
Wang, M. Chi, T. Mullen, C. Kothe)

Demo of the new SNAP, XDF and LSL real time software framework (C.
Kothe)

New real-time brain imaging and BCI with BCILAB/SIFT (T. Mullen, C.
Kothe)

Practicum for new MoBILAB toolbox for multimodal data analysis (A.
Ojeda) </font>

<!-- -->



<font color=red> Track D </font> (SCCN Conference Room) - Advanced ICA
and AMICA concepts (Jason Palmer)



<font color=mediumblue> 9:30 - 10:15 -- C6.D1: Assessing residual source
dependence and dependent subspaces

10:30 - 12:00 -- C6.D2: Estimating multiple component models in
non-stationary environments </font>




<font color=saddlebrown> 12:00 - 1:15 PM -- Lunch on own </font>

1:15 - 3:15 PM -- Concurrent basic & advanced sessions (C7)





Follow-up questions & discussion:

<font color=red> Track A </font> (Main Auditorium) - <font color=red>
Basic track </font> EEGLAB projects & Plug-in programming (A. Delorme)

<font color=red> Track B </font> (Vizlab) - BCILAB and SIFT 'hackathon'
(C. Kothe and T. Mullen)

<font color=red> Track C </font> (High-Tech room) - Measure Projection
(Nima Bigdely Shamlo)

<font color=red> Track D </font> (SCCN Conference Room) - Head modeling
(Zeynep Akalin Acar)

<font color=red> Track E </font> (SCCN SE corner office) - Advanced ICA
concepts and tools (Jason Palmer)




<font color=saddlebrown> 3:00 - 3:15 PM -- Coffee break </font>

<font color=mediumblue> 3:30 - 4:30 PM -- Mining event-related brain
dynamics II (Scott Makeig) </font>

4:30 - 5:00 PM -- Group Discussion and Close



[Category:Workshops](/Category:Workshops "wikilink")
