---
layout: default
title: EEGLAB 2016 Santa Margherita Ligure
permalink: /workshops/EEGLAB_2016_Santa_Margherita_Ligure.html
parent: Workshops
---

![700px\|thumb\|center]({{ site.baseurl }}/assets/images/Group.jpg)

![250px\|thumb\|right\|upright=2.5\|Santa Margherita
Ligure]({{ site.baseurl }}/assets/images/Ligure.jpg)

<font color=red>Participant ressource: </font>[List of restaurant and
location in Santa
Marguerita](http://sccn.ucsd.edu/eeglab/workshop16Italy/SantaMargheritaTipsEEGLAB2016.pdf)
If you have any question about local organization or concern, call or
text Antonio +44 7481 188079 or Arno +33 6508 01366.

21st EEGLAB Workshop
====================

<font color=blue>Santa Margherita Ligure - April 4-8, 2016</font>
The 21st EEGLAB Workshop will take place from Monday April 4th through
Friday April 8th in the village of Santa Margherita Ligure on the
Mediterranean coast of northern Italy (near Portofino). Participants
will be expected to bring laptops with Matlab installed so as to be able
to participate in the practical sessions. The tutorial workshop will
introduce and demonstrate the use of the EEGLAB software environment and
EEGLAB-linked tools for performing advanced analysis of EEG and related
data, with detailed method expositions and practical exercises. The
workshop will be held at the Best Western Hotel Regina Elena, with
recreational opportunities available.

Registration and cost
---------------------

To reimburse travel expenses of Workshop faculty and facilities rental,
costs for the workshop will be as follows:

Registration cost is <b>375 dollars (US) for students and post-docs,
</b> and <b>475 dollars for faculty and others professionals</b>. The
registration costs includes, conference space rental, all coffee breaks,
and a guided short excursion by foot to the village. It use to include
bus to and from the Genoa airport and train station to the conference
venue but we are not able to arrange that at this time. Note that this
is a non-profit event for which the faculty are not compensated.

<b>Warning:</b> This workshop is not for absolute beginners in EEG and
Matlab - such persons would be wasting much of their time. Some parts of
the workshop are fairly technical. The main topics will be advanced
methods for analyzing EEG and allied behavioral data, methods including
spectral decomposition, independent component analysis, inverse source
analysis, information flow, etc.. Some other parts of the workshop will
require basic Matlab scripting capabilities. Some basic web resources
for learning Matlab are discussed below.

<b>Registration pages:</b>

Space at the workshop is limited to 50 participants and is available on
a first come, first served basis.

Please use the Eventbrite website here to register
[here](https://www.eventbrite.com/e/2016-eeglab-workshop-tickets-19710495623?aff=ebrowse).

Attendees must also register at the hotel separately. The link to the
hotel is
[here](http://book.bestwestern.com/bestwestern/IT/Santa-Margherita-Ligure-hotels/BEST-WESTERN-Regina-Elena/Hotel-Overview.do?propertyCode=98080).
The best contact method is email at <info@reginaelena.it>. Please put
**EEGLab Tigullio 2016** in the subject of your email to benefit from
the special rate (expires 1st March, 2016). Please note that we have an
agreement with the hotel and that you MUST stay at the hotel. You must
also pay for all lunches in advance at the hotel. Dinner is left to the
discretion of each participant. The hotel might refuse you access to the
meeting space if you are not staying and eating there. There are two
options, either a double room (€ 340 total) or single room (€260 total).
Details: € 60/40 per night (double/single + breakfast, WiFi, gym) \* 4
nights = € 240/160 per person plus € 25 (Lunch served at three courses)
\* 4 days (Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, Friday) = € 100 per person.
<font color=green>NOTE: The hotel has no more availability for single
rooms at the rate mentioned above. Participants who still need to book a
room can:

-   1\. reserve a single room in the Hotel dependance at the same price
    as before (limited number = 10), with "simpler and more essential
    rooms compared to that of the main building, but the same services".
-   2\. reserve a double room for single use in the main building at an
    higher price.
-   3\. reserve a double room to share with another participant in the
    main building.
-   4\. reserve to another hotel.</font>.

Downloads
---------

<font color = green>**To access most recent previous versions the talk
slides and videos, use the links in the Program listing below! Slides
will be made available during the workshop.**</font>

[Download EEGLAB](ftp://sccn.ucsd.edu/pub/daily/eeglab_current.zip).
Download the latest version of EEGLAB

Optional download below. Data will be made available on USB keys during
the workshop.

[Download a smaller version of the same EEGLAB
dataset](ftp://sccn.ucsd.edu/pub/julie/EEGLAB_Workshop/SmallStern.zip).
This is the same dataset as above but is cut down in size for people who
encounter out-of-memory issues in working with the full dataset.

[Download an EEGLAB STUDY with data from 13
subjects](ftp://sccn.ucsd.edu/pub/STUDYstern.zip). This is a VERY large
(2.3GB) file and may even fail to download the first few times you try.
Make sure you have a fast and reliable Internet connection before
attempting this download.

[Download an EEGLAB STUDY with 5 subjects (1.8
GB)](ftp://sccn.ucsd.edu/pub/STUDY5subjects.zip). Optional download for
more exploration of EEGLAB studies.

The following files are needed for the Source Information Flow Toolbox
(SIFT) practicum:

Please visit [the SIFT
website](http://sccn.ucsd.edu/wiki/SIFT#SIFT_Downloads/) to download all
the available files (SIFT Toolbox, ARFIT toolbox, and Sample Data (143
Mb). We also highly recommend that you download the [SIFT
Handbook/Manual](http://sccn.ucsd.edu/mediawiki/images/d/d2/SIFT_manual_0.1a.pdf)
as we will use this for exercises.

Relevant reading material
-------------------------

The EEGLAB graphic interface is built using the powerful Matlab
scripting language. Enjoying the full capabilities of EEGLAB for
building, testing, and running scripts and functions and performing
custom and automated processing requires basic knowledge of how to
manipulate EEGLAB data structures in Matlab. Because of time
constraints, we will NOT provide an introduction to Matlab scripting.
Instead, attendees must familiarize themselves with Matlab <b>before</b>
coming to the workshop.

New users of Matlab: We recommend running the following demos and
reading these help sections:

After opening the Matlab desktop, select menu item "Help Demos" and run
the following demos. Note that while a demo is running, you can retype
the text (or copy it) to the main Matlab window:



Mathematics - Basic Matrix Operations

Mathematics - Matrix manipulations

Graphics - 2-D Plots

Programming - Manipulating Multidimentional arrays

Programming - Structures

In the Help Content, read and practice at least the following sections:



Getting Started - Matrices and Arrays - Matrices and Magic squares

Getting Started - Matrices and Arrays - Expressions

Getting Started - Matrices and Arrays - Working with Matrices

Getting Started - Graphics - Basic plotting functions

Getting Started - Programming - Flow Control

Getting Started - Programming - Other data structures

Getting Started - Programming - Scripts and Functions

Each section or demo (if read thoroughly) should take you about 10
minutes, for a total here of about 2 hours. If you do not use Matlab
regularly, we encourage you to watch these demos, read these sections,
and practice using the skills they introduce over several days.

If you do not have access to the Matlab demos,
[here](http://sccn.ucsd.edu/eeglab/matlaboverview.html) is a short
online introduction to Matlab (recommended pages, 1 to 12)

<font color="dark blue">*IMPORTANT NOTE:*</font> A portion of the
workshop will be dedicated to writing EEGLAB scripts -- Not being able
to understand Matlab syntax will mean you will miss out on a large
portion of the workshop.

*EEGLAB WIKI:* Refer to the [EEGLAB tutorial wiki](/EEGLAB "wikilink")
for additional help.

Important papers describing EEGLAB processing:
----------------------------------------------

Delorme, A., Makeig, S. [EEGLAB: an open source toolbox for analysis of
single-trial EEG dynamics including independent component
analysis](https://sccn.ucsd.edu/githubwiki/files/eeglab_published.pdf). J Neurosci Methods.2004; Mar 15; 134(1):9-21.

Makeig, S., Debener, S., Onton, J., Delorme, A. [Mining event-related
brain dynamics](https://sccn.ucsd.edu/githubwiki/files/ticsreview_published.pdf). TrendsCogn Sci. 2004; May; 8(5):204-10.

Jung, TP, Makeig, S, Westerfield, M, Townsend, J, Courchesne, E,
Sejnowski, TJ. [Analysis and visualizaion of single-trial event-related
potentials](https://sccn.ucsd.edu/githubwiki/files/jung_hbm01.pdf). Human Brain Mapping.2001; 14(3), 166-185.

Delorme, A., Palmer, J. Oostenveld, R., Onton, J., Makeig, S.
[<font color=blue>Independent components of EEG data are
dipolar</font>](http://www.plosone.org/article/info%3Adoi%2F10.1371%2Fjournal.pone.0030135).
PLoS ONE. 2012. i7(2):e30135.

Delorme, A., Sejnowski, T., Makeig, S. [Improved rejection of artifacts
from EEG data using high-order statistics and independent component
analysis](https://sccn.ucsd.edu/githubwiki/files/neuroimage2007_reformated.pdf). Neuroimage.2007; 34, 1443-1449.

Onton J, Delorme, A., Makeig, S. [Frontal midline EEG dynamics during
working memory](https://sccn.ucsd.edu/githubwiki/files/onton_fmtheta_published.pdf).NeuroImage. 2005;27, 341-356

Material for download
---------------------

Please download the following programs

> `    `<font color=orange>`To be posted here at a later date.`</font>

Workshop Program (with corresponding PDFs)
------------------------------------------

[250px\|thumb\|right\|upright=2.5\|participant subgroup before taking
the bus]({{ site.baseurl }}/assets/images/Sml_workshop.jpg)

<font color=purple>Purple lettering = lecture</font>
<font color=orange>Orange lettering = tutorial</font>

<u><font color=blue>Monday, April 4th</font></u> Participants arrive by
train or by car.


<font color = purple>19:00 - 19:30 -- Welcome comments and
orientation</font>

<font color = green>19:30 -- Dinner on your own</font>

<u><font color=blue>Tuesday, April 5th</font></u>


<font color = green>7:30 - 9:00 Breakfast</font>

<!-- -->


**Overview and ICA Theory/Practice**


<font color = purple>9:00 – 10:15 -- Mining event-related brain dynamics
I (Scott Makeig)</font>
[PDF](https://sccn.ucsd.edu/githubwiki/files/makeig_eeglab_mining_i.pdf‎)
<font color = purple>10:15 – 10:45 -- EEGLAB overview (Arnaud
Delorme)</font>
[PDF](https://sccn.ucsd.edu/githubwiki/files/eeglab2016_ad_eeglab_overview.pdf‎)

<font color = green>-- Break--</font>

<font color = purple>11:15 – 12:00 -- ICA theory (Arnaud Delorme)</font>
[PDF‎](https://sccn.ucsd.edu/githubwiki/files/eeglab2016_ad_lecture_ica.pdf)
<font color = orange>12:00 – 13:00 -- EEG data import, Artifact
rejection (Tracy Brandmeyer)</font>
[PDF](https://sccn.ucsd.edu/githubwiki/files/eeglab2016_tb_artifact_and_ica.pdf)
<!-- -->


<font color = green>13:00-14:30 Lunch --</font>

<!-- -->


**ICA and time-frequency**


<font color = orange>14:30 – 15:15 -- ICA decomposition of EEG data
practicum (John Iversen)</font>
[PDF](https://sccn.ucsd.edu/githubwiki/files/eeglab2016_italia_jri_ica_decompositionevaluation_lores2.pdf)
<font color = orange>15:15 – 16:30 -- Evaluating ICA components
practicum (John Iversen)</font>
[PDF](https://sccn.ucsd.edu/githubwiki/files/eeglab2016_italia_jri_evaluateics_practicum.pdf)

<font color = green>-- Break--</font>

<font color = purple>17:00 – 18:00 -- Time-frequency decompositions of
EEG data: Theory and practice (John Iversen)</font>
[PDF](https://sccn.ucsd.edu/githubwiki/files/eeglab2016_italia_jri_timefrequencytheorypractice_lores.pdf‎)
<!-- -->


<font color = green>Dinner on your own</font>

<u><font color=blue>Wednesday, April 6th</font></u>


<font color = green>7:30 - 9:00 Breakfast</font>

<!-- -->


**Group analysis and ICA clustering in EEGLAB**


<font color = purple>9:00 - 9:45 -- Why cluster ICA components of EEG
data? (Scott Makeig)</font>
[PDF](https://sccn.ucsd.edu/githubwiki/files/makeig_eeglab_clustering.pdf‎)
<font color = purple>9:45 - 10:45 -- Robust statistics, experimental
design and correction for multiple comparisons of EEG data (Cyril
Pernet)</font> [PDF](https://sccn.ucsd.edu/githubwiki/files/robuststats_ci_mcc_for_eeg.pdf‎)

<font color = green>-- Break--</font>

<font color = purple>11:15 - 12:15 -- Creating an EEGLAB STUDY, STUDY
design, and plotting STUDY results (Arnaud Delorme)</font>
[PDF](https://sccn.ucsd.edu/githubwiki/files/eeglab2016_ad_study_design2.pdf‎)
<font color = purple>12:15 - 13:00 -- Clustering components within
EEGLAB (Arnaud Delorme)</font>
[PDF](https://sccn.ucsd.edu/githubwiki/files/eeglab2016_ad_study_clustering.pdf‎)
<!-- -->


<font color = green>13:00-14:30 Lunch --</font>

<!-- -->


<font color = green>14:30-18:00-- Excursion to Portofino with
professional guide - special instructions will be given</font>

<!-- -->


<font color = green>Dinner on your own</font>

<u><font color=blue>Thursday, April 7th</font></u>


<font color = green>7:30 - 9:00 Breakfast</font>

<!-- -->


**Source Localization**


<font color = purple>9:00 – 10:15 -- Forward and inverse models - the
Dipfit/NFT tools (Scott Makeig)</font>
[PDF](https://sccn.ucsd.edu/githubwiki/files/eeglab2013_sm_sourcelocalization.pdf‎)
<font color = purple>10:15 – 10:45 -- DIPFIT practicum (Arnaud
Delorme)</font> [PDF](https://sccn.ucsd.edu/githubwiki/files/eeglab2016_ad_dipfit.pdf‎)
<!-- -->



<font color = green>-- Break--</font>

<!-- -->


**General Linear Modeling**


<font color = orange>11:15 – 12:00 -- Theory and practice of applying
general linear models to EEG data using the LIMO EEGLAB plug-in (Cyril
Pernet)</font> [PDF](https://sccn.ucsd.edu/githubwiki/files/eeglab_limo_2016.pdf‎)
<!-- -->


<font color=green>13:00-14:30 Lunch --</font>

<!-- -->


**Source information flow and scripting**


<font color=purple>14:30 – 16:00 -- Source information flow and
Granger-Causal modeling tools (John Iversen )</font>
[PDF](https://sccn.ucsd.edu/githubwiki/files/eeglab2016_italia_jri_connectivity.pdf)
<font color=orange>16:00 – 16:30 -- RELICA plugin for EEGLAB and ICA
decomposition optimization (Fiorenzo Artoni)</font>
[PDF](https://sccn.ucsd.edu/githubwiki/files/eeglab2016_fa_relica.pdf‎)

<font color = green>-- Break--</font>

<font color=orange>17:00 – 18:00 -- Scripting using STUDY within EEGLAB
(Arnaud Delorme)</font>
[PDF](https://sccn.ucsd.edu/githubwiki/files/eeglab2016_ad_eeglab_script.pdf‎)
<!-- -->


<font color=green>Dinner on your own</font>

<u><font color=blue>Friday, April 8th</font></u>


<font color=green>7:30-9:00 -- Breakfast</font>

<!-- -->



<font color=purple>9:00 – 10:15 -- Mining event-related brain dynamics
II (Scott Makeig)</font>
[PDF](https://sccn.ucsd.edu/githubwiki/files/eeglab2016_sm_miningii.pdf‎)
<font color=orange>10:15 – 10:45 -- Using and building EEGLAB
extensions/plug-ins (Arnaud Delorme)</font>
[PDF](https://sccn.ucsd.edu/githubwiki/files/eeglab2016_ad_eeglab_plugins.pdf‎)
<!-- -->



<font color = green>-- Break--</font>

<!-- -->



<font color=orange>11:15 – 12:30 -- Practicum, small group projects -
[possible projects](https://sccn.ucsd.edu/githubwiki/files/eeglab2016_projects.pdf‎)</font>
<font color=orange>12:30 – 13:00 -- Participant project presentations
and general discussion</font>

<font color=orange>13:00 -- Workshop closes</font>

<!-- -->


<font color=green>13:00 -- Lunch</font>

[Category:Workshops](/Category:Workshops "wikilink")
