---
layout: default
title: Arguments
permalink: /docs/Arguments
parent: Docs
---

MATLAB File Help: code/argumentsDefault Topics code/arguments

Contents of arguments:

arg - A (rich) specification of a function argument, for use in
arg_define() clauses. arg_define - Declare function arguments with
optional defaults and built-in GUI support. arg_extract - Extract
arguments from Args; simple version, see notes. arg_guidialog - Create
an input dialog that displays input fields for a Function and
Parameters. arg_guidialog_ex - Create an input dialog that displays
input fields for a Function and Parameters. arg_guipanel - Create a
uipanel that displays an argument property inspector for a Function.
arg_nogui - Like arg(), but not displayed by GUIs. arg_norep - Like
arg(), but not reported to outer functions (inluding GUIs or other
frameworks). arg_report - Report information of a certain Type from the
given Function. arg_specifier - Internal: create a base specifier
struct for an argument. arg_sub - Specify an argument of a function
which is a structure of sub-arguments. arg_subswitch - Specify a
function argument that can be one of several alternative structs.
arg_subtoggle - Specify an argument of a function which is a struct of
sub-arguments that can be disabled. arg_tovals - Convert a 'rich'
argument report into a 'vals' report. arg_toworkspace - Copy the
arguments in the given Struct into the workspace of the calling
function. declare_properties - Declare properties of a function.
parse_help - helper function for the arg\* specifiers, to parse the
help into a first and second part.